We came at the end  actually  and they were just died of hunger and tuberculosis.
But not thats in the barracks they were beaten  but people just died from hunger.
The packages became sporadic  eventually there was a cut off point but they were our lifesavers because the famine in 1941 became very severe.
We started off with 10 children  and little by little  the group got smaller as the children died from hunger or were caught and killed.
From the day the war broke out  we knew nothing but hunger.
So the hunger was not as bad in Warsaw as it had been in Birkenau.
So badly  we used to take leaves and crush the tobacco and roll it in newspaper to smoke.
Only  what I can tell you the most outstanding features in the Warsaw ghetto  when I was there  were hunger and typhus.
Zellinger did give a bribe to them.... The other cell was already a cell for people which had the means--doctors  lawyers from the ghetto--and there was no hunger over there.
One of my brothers died at the age of six years  probably from hunger in time of revolution.
That was another period of great hunger for us  because we crossed the -- we had to cross the river  into -- onto the other side  you know  because the Russian was -- were advancing.
After the war I was looking in the eyes of every German girl and I couldn't understand why a German woman  maybe she was 18  19 you know something like this  why she would do it to me and I didn't get any bread and I wouldn't take any bread because to me shame was worse than hunger.
And  of course  within a few days  there were shortages of water and food and electricity.
It wasn't so bad  because she was young and she warmed me up and I don't know if I missed my mother so much because now that I reason to myself  there was no much love that a child felt and I myself am a mother  and I understand in this circumstances  where you see your own children dying from hunger and crying  \ Mother  I am hungry \  and she couldn't do anything.
In the midst of of a famine in the war zone  they were extremely kind to strangers.
And then he helped me -- that was at the time when I broke down out of hunger  and he was able to -- you know  he was our kapo and as kapo  he was supervising the food rations which we got.
>> Bill Benson: Leon  hunger was so ever present  and you told me that sometimes people would be able to get a prescription from a doctor within the ghetto for potato peels.
When we got into that ghetto when they condensed the ghettos  we got a little more food.
As I said  ine fight with the hunger  with the weather  with the cold was ---.
And I s -- when I say hunger  I mean hunger.
My nature is very strong  and I feel that has to do a lot why I survived and others didn't because let's face it  not everybody died in the gas chamber  not everybody died from bullets  not everybody died from beaten up  or from hunger.
And there were people who were mostly intelligentsia  which they werent used to that type of life  they didnt know how to help themselves  and a lot of them  a lot of them  a lot of them died  just like in the concentration camps  from hunger.
There was just this fear  this schnell  schnell  schnell  and no food  and the hunger and the beatings and the screamings at night.
They were not sufficient to feed you  and you would see them collapse in the streets of hunger.
How do I describe hunger to someone that has probably had breakfast and lunch today?
And and the plane those people were working at the front  and and this hit them  the hunger and everything  and with the families they were  the families were lying in front of their families of the other member.
Like just a huppa 5  you know  or something and some kind of a life  but people were dying of hunger.
And when   when the priest asked wh at was Christ  one of th e girls said  ﬁA hunger artist.ﬂ And then he said  ﬁWho sa id that?ﬂ And of cour se  nobody did say so I was one of the ones who were supposed to have said it and three or four others were ther e too.
There was a lot of dying and hunger and exhaustion  etc.
And how unselfish can a person be when he is dying from hunger to give the last piece of bread?
A terrible hunger was in my father's house because sometimes I was running from the kibbutz to see how my father is doing.
And just  I kept on thinking about  I want ed to turn my mind off so I was trying to think of stories but the hunger took over.
That was my fathers idea  to make it look so bad that the Germans w ouldnt need to bring either Ukrainians or Lithuanians or Latvians to the ghetto gates  because if you would have either one of those people at the gates  these people would die from hunger.
What's life like in the ghetto in terms of health and daily -- >> Nat Shaffir: There was always a problem -- famine was one of the big problems.
>> Al Munzer: Well  that was a time of terrible hunger in Holland.
I remember being very  ve ry hungry in the concentration camp  but maybe because in concentration camp it was - it was  I mean  we were almost dying from hunger that - that the camp in Starachowice was already like a restaurant.
The next morning we're so hungry that raw potato didn't do much for your hunger.
And I developed fever  I got like red lines on my legs  it was all from hunger.
They were more used to hunger  they were more used to filth.
And if you will sing  you will find out that your hunger goes away a little bit.\
There were -- a lot of people were swollen from hunger  begging for food.
So -- uh -- then the -- the hunger got so great that the -- and we got to the end -- toward the end  you know  the Germans knew -- toward the end.
TL: (Russian--wrote about at first about hunger... products later about work in brigade wanted to help family also wrote about facts of life  coldness politics  love  questions) Video Tape No.
There was no brain  it just says hunger  I want to eat  I want to eat no matter what  I want to eat.
Then he came and convinced us we should stop the strike  the...the hunger strike  and really we did stop and we got permits to go to Israel.
Dont forget the meantime they were grabbing people more and more and se nding and many people voluntary were coming because they were starving from hunger.
They had to be -- it -- it was an wild horde of hungry  miserable people  yeah  in the beginning.
What I remember is--I don't remember a tremendous amount of hardships or famine  I don't rememb er doing without.
Whenever I say hungry  I mean not hey  I would like to eat some  I mean hungry that you were starving  okay?
I don't think so I suffered so much the hunger  like the...no  didn't bother me like seeing kill-the families separated  killed.
And suddenly there was a shortage of water  food  hunger and simply bedlam.
By this time already there was more hunger in the ghetto and anyway  the Jewish the Judenrat was forced to make a list of so many people for resettling.
The fact is that she died from hunger and I didn't  so she might probably have given sometimes to me her piece of bread.
And here I have to tell you a very interesting moment at night he was afraid th at the -- that the hunger will -- will force me to go out and take some food that I cannot digest.
Because hunger and no place to wash  no place to  if somebody got sick there was no medication.
Of course its brought on by  by mistreatme nt  by hunger.
Now are there any other things you remember during that period of Italian occupation that be -- the famine  but were the Italians ta king any measures against the Jews?
You said before that there was no real hunger in this neighborhood that you were in?
Out of Warsaw  my mother had two sisters in another part of town or a hundred kilometers from  from Warsaw  where the hunger was not so great and there was a little bit possibilities for food.
Uh of course the whole thing with uh...we thought that autumn  that we would be liberated in September of 1944 and we weren't and we had had such big hopes that we would be 10 liberated and we had to go through the whole winter which was the hunger winter in Holland...there was no food...and I think we were all pretty depressed.
When I was ready to to faint from hunger  I would take a little crumb and put it on my tongue and just keep on sucking on it to keep me alive.
There were moments  you know  when we got in the piece of bread in the evening  so I ate the whole thing at once.
To eat up  and make you feel that you sa tisfied your hunger  or take a bite now  and save it  and take a bite later?
On the way  many of my friends collapsed and died of hunger  illness  cold weather  simply exhaus tion; they couldn't go anymore.
Everybody had the same attitude towards life  the same feeling  hunger.
They were just helpless  very ill or dehydrated of... or...or from hunger.
I'll never figure...figure out how they could do it when there was sickness and typhus and hunger.
I lived in Tashkent for about nine months working on that machine  which even though there was hunger and not enough food  but I survived in that place.
It became very important  and this is how you passed the hours and forgot the hunger and  and the cold.
There were  there was obviously a shortage of food  although we were not starving yet.
As was the case with most of the Jews and under this circumstances  we experienced unbearable pain because of hunger  suffering  and degredation and hard work.
And having seen hunger and having seen all that  you know  he -- he was much more mature -- much more mature.
Whether it was cold  whether it was raining  whether it was sunshine you had to be counted and during the same time that we were all standing out there  they would run horse-drawn carriage where they threw the bodies of those people who were either shot or hanged or had died from hunger  from whatever  and they wanted to make sure that we see each morning these horse-drawn carriages drive by.
The south of Holland was liberated some time early of 45 and people at the time didnt know what was going on in the north but in the north you had what was called the hunger winter because as the Germans were being defeated and withdrawi ng they took all the foodstuffs they could lay their hands on and the consequence was that something like 15 000 people in northern Holland died of hunger because there wasnt anything they could put in their stomach  remarkable.
But as we talked earlier about the famine  and what complicity the British had.
There were  there was obviously a shortage of food  although we were not starving yet.
I don't know if there are any adjectives with which to describe what real hunger is.
Yes  I am maybe right now ashamed to say  to compare what was in Warsaw   yes we did have we didnt have we didnt suffer hunger.
Again  a lot of people got sick from starvation and died.
She worked at the hunger in Mexico  she devoted a lot of time to that.
Many of us started to die from hunger  from cold  from diseases.
The main thing so we were not hungry  we had bread .
And  finally there was like on this limited place  like almost half a m illion Jews living in terrible conditions  living on a  on a nutrition base which was below the subsistence level  attacked by dirt and hunger and soon the other killing factor was typhus which was rampant in the  German  in the Warsaw ghetto.
People were dying of hunger and starvation and the streets were littered with corpses.
And then one day I realized  how on earth can we expect the children to know what hunger is when after every dinner they have a very important decision to make: Do I now eat two scoops of vanilla and one scoop of chocolate ice cream or should it be two scoops of chocolate and one of them vanilla?
At that time  hunger was already a big aspect of ghetto life because you know that people just died of hunger.
We know there was hunger  th en there was -- there is no clothes  it was [indecipherable]  and there were ne -- not enough place for them  bu t theyre alive.
They were in Lodz ghetto and they perished and they probably were the first to die from hunger because they were not able to work.
In the mornings  I reme mber I was starved all ready  but I didnt suffer all that much from hunger  but I remember I would say to my mother  ﬁMomika  Im so hungry.ﬂ So  she would give me her portion.
People that were dropping dead from hunger  from disease  from dysentery; because they did not have the strength  or because they gave up.
So nobody  nobody starve from hunger  nobody  but it happened after things that people were rich had to go out and leave their nice apartment and suites and sometimes also their cars.
A lot of  lot of hunger  but still not as serious.
And had outlived his time -- that normally was people lived  if they worked for a year  and then they went down  you know [indecipherable] and then I did this for three years  and prior to that  in the inter-internment camps in France  which were not that bad  they didnt kill people  but some people died from hunger  and so -- and then I had escaped actually twice  once in France  but then I got caught there  and well they -- they explained a ll that.
I do remember nothing very much  except that I was happy to be in company with my own grade -- kind  and I was not a good eater before we left Germany  and thats why my -- my hunger  probably was not so bad that time.
But I dont think  when we talking about a five year old ha ving any judgment to judge what the war is  or peace  its only the minute he feels it  in my opinion  he feels it  what a war is  you know  or what hunger is .
But the famine there was worse than it was in the south.
so I this  and was la and eating  because my stomach was so hurting all the time from hunger.
And we already  our group  too already possessed couple of pistols that we really bought on the outside of the ghettos  smuggled it in and paid with hunger by not eating  by not having that slice of bread to be able to obtain the pistol.
We -- you know its so hard to come back to talk about the hunger  because hunger was as present as -- as -- as the blood runs in your -- in your -- in your veins  you know?
Hunger doesn't stop  no matter what  no matter how you are  especially when you are young.
The next day from hunger water came out  and this the picture.
There was such terrible terrible hunger and then primarily what I seem to be impressed with was that then suddenly life ebbed out the precision of the corpses seemed to tell this as a story.
Somehow they organized themselves that only certain things were put a little bit so we had hunger strikes there against these people and not only this.
You know  if we didnt accomplish anything over there  but many people  many  many people that died from hunger.
Food was scarce and the food they gave to the prisoners was a hunger ration.
But by now we came to a state where you had to choose between possibly instant death by being caught and by being set up against and the wall being shot or being shipped to Poland to maybe die of cold and hunger or whatever that was there.
And one day this -- Genneg was his name -- came home and he said there is a nunnery and they have men  they are all swollen up from hunger after the concentration camp.
Finally  Morrison  who was the Secretary of Labor in the English government and a Jew  came down to us and tried...Yeah...we...we...to convince us we shouldn't have a hunger strike and we shouldn't do this and that  and I wrote especially hymn for the Holy Pesach there and...uh..and that c'est l'appell was everyday and everyone came out and we had a hunger strike for 98 hours.
My friends bury his mother and father from hunger - She was swollen.
When we run into the woods we used to grab the leaves  dried leaves from the trees  and we had the paper from the cement paper  and roll them up and we smoked just to relieve the hunger.
So whoever  whoever didn't make it it was because of hunger or  or they got sick?
In the factories or the \ resorts \  were you ever aware of efforts to kind of sabotage the production of hunger strikes or anything like that?
Enough bread  just bread to satisfy your hunger and then I don't care what happens.
So in the beginning  when we were in ghetto  we have to go.
We heard that there were -- no  that it was very bad  and that many people died  but we thought of hunger  and of dysentery  and of sicknesses.
So they went into Warsaw and they told people in Warsaw -- they were starving there in the streets  and a lot of people had nothing to eat -- in the ghettos because the poor people didn't have no money to pay for anything.
Hunger was the great problem there and  of course  hunger was the one problem.
She remembered that after hunger and starving  it's the worst thing you can do  t o start eating.
That went on for a long time  like an eternity  but it seems like when winter came it was doubly difficult  because we had to contend  not only with hunger and horrible conditions of living  but there was the cold  there was no wood to heat the places  there was not enough clothing to protect us  and in spite of my mother's support and love there was creeping in a feeling of despair  and there was a lot of demoralization in the ghetto.
Hunger  beating  starvation  and then finally killed  and you will say  ﬁWe ll  if I can get these men  I am going to kill them.ﬂ Sure now  in 1999  you dont think about it  because we are normal people  la -- we live in America.
Some people could not control themselves and they ate it right away and later on they just were terribly hungry.
If you didn't have any packages coming in from the outside there was a good chance you would die from hunger there.
The women th at were just little bit stronger among our own women started to be like nurses  carried a little bit of food to give us  make sure -- many  many of us went on hunger strikes after libera tion.
That they put us into the ghetto and I had to go out to get some food  because nobody else could.
Now  the problems in the ghetto were hunger  lack of fuel.
Whether they ate them when they were starving  when there was starvation in the [indecipherable] you know  or or what  I dont know.
Hunger was probably the biggest cause of death–was to try to get outside the camp and get some food.
As soon as a man got a scrap in his hand  he thrust it into his mouth; the hunger was fierce.
When you have...when you are hungry  you don't care where you're going or the enemy because the hunger  starvation...the air is good.
And she suffered very much  hunger and and no place to stay  nothing .
But taking care of these patients who hadn't  were starving  and had typhus.
We stemmed the hunger and take very -- took very little  could survive and hope for later.
So even when the store was lost  you dont remember hunger  as a result of that?
People say well why didn't you do something  why didn't you escape  why wasn't -- the question isn't even justifiable because in Auschwitz the fear  the electric wires  the beatings  the hunger  the starvation  the degradation  you know  the way you were treated  you never had time to think.
Hunger is not only causing a terrible pain in your stomach  but your brain dont functions.
When did food improve  that you would be able to have enough to eat  that you didnt feel hungry.
And there were some laborers  they lived separately  and they were the French prisoners of war  our neighbors  who gave us courage by letting us know where the war is standing  that it's not too distant until liberation  because by then we were so terribly starved that I developed what you call hunger edema  it's . . .
But ironically  these people lived through cold and hunger but nobody killed them.
They could not cross the wall  but at the same time it was a horrible feeling of an i ndescribable hunger.
With hunger  no water; they were begging for food  they were begging for them to be saved.
There was already hunger  there was already a lack of food  there was lack of warmth  it was very  very cold.
But the horses died from hunger a long time ago  and they make made bread for the population.
There are childhood memories and it's interesting th at poverty and hunger and need can be stimulate within you creativity and inventiveness and I think that's what made it in a wa y fun for us kids at that age.
There was no hunger in -- in those days and life went on.
We found that out later and--and food and the most of them died of starvation and of thirst.
On the way  many of my friends collapsed and died of hunger  illness  cold weather  simply exhaustion; they couldn't go anymore.
>> Bill Benson: This is people who had starved to death.
When you see...when you see a child hunger  is there any worse or suffering.
Because as you see in the Anne Frank story  people were eating their fami ly members food.. At once I had nothing  and I turned around I walked back and the rabbi died from hunger.
And if you never experience war or hunger  you cant just -- cant talk about it.
There were  there was obviously a shortage of food  although we were not starving yet.
There were people who were going on a hunger strike for so and so long in order to  to show  to prove something.
The strike takes place; and these people  because of the particular position of the at that time Labor [Party] government in Engla nd  they are...the human cry of [a] 96- hour hunger strike is so large in the world they are permitted to go to Palestine with these boats under British escort  not under British guard.
Even the grass was no longer there because people even ate grass out of hunger.
And...and the only thing...I mean  to compensate hunger  we were drinking water.
These peoples were considered inhuman  but they were crazed from hunger  some of these people.
A person like my rabbi  nobody could visualize  and he himself he was just dyi ng from hunger.
But  again  rel-relief would come from hunger in -- in the summertime  when -- because of vegetables [indecipherable] vegetables.
And  the hunger was awful  the thirst was awful  the cold was indescribable  terror and being afraid of everything and anything  because anything alive was my enemy.
I think because this is the final victimization because even if you are dying of hunger  even though you're dying of disease  y ou still have a certain control.
Hunger was forgotten  Because the one thing in my mind Was to take revenge on the lot.
If they stop the hunger strike  because England couldn't accept the fact that 1100 or so people would die on the banks of the Mediterranean  having come out of concentration camps and now they're going to perish from starvation.
Something that I -- that I thirst for  I had hunger for it.
We had more th an we did need  so we did help others which were dying from hunger.
So I said  look  we are alive  yes  but you know  we probably will die from hunger cause we have no money  nothing to sell  145 and how do we survive?
In Krackow  there was such famine that we decided...that in Krackow  there was...yeah...there was such famine that we decided foolishly...I say we...there was a boy from Czechoslovakia  there were always ot her...other people we were with.
I know there was a terrible famine going on in the north at the time.
It was in year '21  '22  when in Russia was a period of hunger.
That I was the hunger that overpowered the even second thought  ﬁShould I pick up this core?ﬂ Because after all it was on the road and it could have been thrown away by some sick person  and it could have been the  the god only knows  dogs could have been over it and whatever.
When we came to...to Ebensee  the hunger and the labor and the way--especially for us Jews--the way we were treated  we were sure that not one will survive that camp.
But how long can it last  a week or so  and then hunger again.
Bread was scarce  there was a ration of bread  sugar and flour.
But hunger  the hunger was stronger than the resistance not to eat.
They forced uh these Jews from the countryside to come back to Budapest and...those who had left Budapest...and they concentrated them in the old ghetto  which could support ma ybe two  three million p eople...not fifty or sixty...two or three thousand people  not fifty or sixty thousand people  and so there was this black  terrible hunger.
So  my basic hunger was to an extent satiated  and then I went out myself and I organized some thing also one of those cans I managed to bring back.
There was a central kitchen then  food being scarce  and all that.
The people who had remained in the camp were the people who had come on the first hunger march...some of them remained in the camp  perhaps two thousand  discovered that there were food barracks...there were barracks full of food  magazines  and started to attack them and tried to get in to get food and they were repelled by the SS which uh shot many of them and many of them were in front of our little window and we saw them   laying there and some had friends who brought them back and others were laying there and after a while uh these attacks repeated themselve and the SS shot again and this became crescendo  always stronger and stronger and then there came a general offensive from the SS.
People were dying from hunger and there were too many of them; they just had flatbeds with horses.
Like I said earlier  there were shortages of food  water  electricity.
I heard that you could get 100 Gelders for betraying a Jew  and our maid  who uh  was deep in the black market  was uh  because of her family  transporting and this food to Germany  and stealing from it  and selling it  that that saved our lives because many people died from hunger.
Dont forget that things were harder in cities always than in the country  there was a shortage of food by then  and all.
But they went into the larder in the evening  secretly  and took whatever they needed to satisfy their hunger.
From typhus epidemic that was raging in the Warsaw Ghetto from famine because the sanitary conditions were very poor at the time and the overcrowding brought in lice and lice begot typhus.
And by this  we  we  the best   we had no hunger.
And they allowed him to go around and and get the darts thrown at the people who make hunger and everything.
So at least we had some supplement or food in the morning  before we went to work  which I received a piece of bread  that was it  nothing else.
I mean things were moving so fast  but there was hunger and the living conditions and the beatings and the killings.
That time it wasn't that bad  th at time it was' that bad  yet  it was later on for us  much worse  about hunger and this .
How does one forget the years of Harry Alexander 40 October 11  1995 Page 40 degradation  the humiliation  the hunger and sickness.
The soup never reached the people because the hunger was so great --the hunger was so great from the people that they became inhuman.
The hunger was so bad  and people lost weight  and they got sick  you know.
Do I really need to explain and to tell the value of food in the ghetto when there was such hunger?
We had -- we were not wealthy  but we were comfortable  we never had -- except for the war  hunger  or whatever.
Some died from hunger  starvation but some survived  so it was not as...I had it very well  you know  I I had a good job.
I think this is the greatest pain that a human can have  this hunger pain.
They decided to do the most thing they could do to illustrate their position and went for a hunger strike.
But eventually when the hunger to ol over you no longer could do it anymore because I remember a young pupil once of a Rabbi  when I was in Chair-hon-off .
Like people  I am sure that my mother  not only from hunger she died  as from saying  \ I don't want anymore to live.
But in the wintertime  when you have to be there  I mean three-quarters of the people died from hunger and from starvation and from cold.
I mean  as much as my life was difficult and I saw lots of horrors  and -- and went through a lot of hunger  and everything else  but the fact that I was not in the concentration camp s  I always say Im lucky  and I really look up to those people from concentration camp that -- that survived  which is truly a -- an unbelievable miracle.
I mean  we were hungry  very hungry  because the food was very -- this was very little food there.
As I said  I do  did know something going on with the German Jews and I knew there wa s famine in China.
So  when Hania opened her eyes because she basically fainted from hunger and from exhaustion and everything and she opened her eyes and I was holding onto her hands  and she had this smile on her face  not knowing at all what ha s happened to her.
There are millions of peop -- children every day  die from hunger -- starvati on.
Sometimes feeling of hunger  and basically also a feeling of loneliness  you know  I was -- I was -- I didnt have any friends  I didnt have anybody to -- to associate with  and I lost all my -- the contact with all my - my playmates  my -- my classmates  you know.
I dont remember feeling hungry there in ghetto that I felt I -- I didnt have food  but I was so scared that probably  you know  suppressed the -- the -- the hunger.
The robin -- the robins  and b -- and hummi ngbirds  are all astound to what may  busy with their catch  to quench hunger  in view of the beast.
Unfortunately  there are genocides going on in the world right now  and hunger too.
I looked more like a dead ma n. The hunger was terrible.
19 And the cause of this famine in Greece  was that because ships could not get through to the port?
And it was a question of hunger and people dying and whatever  a nd things getting rotten at the same time.
I see your little streets in pain  and in  and in hunger.
It started almost like a play in the very beginning when we were in the ghetto  it was still summer  and we said  we got together  had nothing to do  all we talked about is hunger  we said  well  let's try and dig a tunnel.
I mean  you really...people really don't know that thirst is even worse than hunger.
>> Bill Benson: People literally starved to death and you remember that.
When I was in ghetto for the short time that I was  there was a lot of  uh  a lot of misery  a lot of  a lot of like I say  hunger was one thing.
Y-Yeah  well you know  it was really long time  the hunger was hunger was a one of the big  big problems.
And they immediately  when they heard about oh theres a hunger strike.
I personally feel that if the War would have lasted another 10 days  we all would have been dead  because it was the end of the line  as far as the hunger  and the sickness.
Maybe I was too young to remember hunger  you know  and then we had three acti akcjas they call it  you know.
At the same time when I went over to the other children  there was less food and less [indecipherable] but  at that time it wasnt a question of hunger or no hunger  and it didnt make a difference.
So  for example  as I remember  there was one Quaker service in Ir eland during the potato famine.
And the famine  and the people there are go...going from one part of the country to another part of the country.
I can feel the pain  the hunger  you know  that I went through.
Thanks to the resourcefulness of my father  there was never any real hunger.
Some of them got starved from hunger  some of them got killed  some of them got killed in the part isans.
And I remember he was starving  but so was his dog  and he didnt have anything to give to the dog  and the d og ultimately died of hunger.
These were people who who were either executed or died in the hospital or died of hunger or exhaustion.
Did a lot of people die just naturally because of exhaustion and hunger?
Hunger and cold became  you know  so severe that while working at the airport  we didnt have any chance to get food with exception at midnight were getting a little bit warm soup  which if somebody would have this soup in America  you would think this is not even good for a hungry dog or cat.
I was always full of fear and hunger doesn't always assert itself when you're full of fear.
cards  they would die for hunger because they wouldn't get any rations.
I -- I could not eat it  and it was a big problem.
They had lice and hunger and typhus and typhoid  and people were dying in that camp like flies.
It's amazing how much cold and hunger we can endure and still remain human.
People from all over who just have this hunger to be with somebody who has the same background.
It made us forget about the hunger and about all the inadequacies of living such a primitive life  and this school existed for several months.
And the name was they are taking them out to work  and the places would be much better  because here already  hunger started.
So that was not as bad with the hunger but we were still afraid what the German are going to do with us.
All three of them died from hunger in her presence  so she was mentally slightly touched off.
It wasn't well you see  the little  the boys used to go out and sit on the latrine and they were so weak from hunger  sick they just fell into and nobody could have helped them.
One day I was fainting because between the hunger and malnutrition  I was just fainting.
With hunger  with -- with -- you know  and -- and -- and one of the things 52 that I -- I saw is a lot of the -- of the hearses  you know  that that -- you saw a lot of that horse drawn -- cause they were collecti ng bodies.
And then  some people who I know used to come in and they were swollen from hunger.
02:06:00 I hope nobody has to go through hunger the way we did.
Interview with Adam Szymel January 25  2015 41 Did people know about the famine that was in the Ukraine?
End of Side B  Tape 1) But in your heart when you talk all the atrocities  all the horror  all the pain  the hunger  the thirst  the humiliation  the hurt  the worry about your relatives  the pain what is unbearable when you see your friend die next to you  the lice bites  the fever without aspirin  without water  itching  filth.
So poverty and hunger were pervasive  but we we re we were worse off than they were  because we didnt have these resources that th ey were used to; the animals that provided them with nutritious food.
And after I had a few days of hunger  I said  He's not going to help me.
By hunger  starvation  sickness or whatever th -- whatever they did.
ﬁWhat should we do?ﬂ If we dont go with them and we stay there  we probably die from hunger.
He died of being on a hunger strike for  I believe  ten days.
I have all the poems that I translated  and Poznanski  Jakov Poznanski   now his work -- as you could see  I have a Xeroxed copy of the book  and he was a lawyer  a grown man of -- of some experience  life experience  and his is a very detailed  and very analytical description of the events in the Lodz ghetto  whereas the Sierakowiak  David Sierakowiak was a youngster of 16  a budding poet  and his work is all emotion  and all vibr ant longing and of course pos -- Poznanski   the older man survived  but Sierakowiak died of hunger in the Lodz ghetto  but his diary was saved.
I  I  I  I just didn't had enough strength to continue from hunger and thirst.
So  to make a long story s hort  I knew hunger and cold and humiliation of being poor  walking around in tattered clothes even before the war.
I could go on with hunger and thirst  but I couldn't go on for any length of time without hearing a human voice.
And I risk it  so  but hunger was much stronger  and I didn't  I never worried to die by the way  this was one thing.
She took care of this old lady  and if someone was hungry she was able to give her food to that person  and you know  no one did that because the hunger was to such a degree  I mean  it's unbelievable to be able to be so hungry that you just didn't give what you had  you know  so she was able to be so good  and so  there were such people.
I was used not to eat  because eat  the food was only bread when we got off from th e work  you know?
This was in the ghetto where which hunger was was giving everybody an unen durable pain  just the the feeling of hunger.
Because they had just gone through that World War Two thing and the Nazis and persecutions and hardships and USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0016 40 hunger.
My father  uh  luckily  because of him we  I survived  uh wo rked in uh as a fire  fire dept  he got me a job to work in the ghetto rather than go outside  outside the ghetto  where the suffering was more  the hunger was more.
Three quarters of them are dead of starvation and hunger and over-work  but there is a good chunk of hundreds of thousands.
Had they died from starvation  or from -- Cold  and -- and -- and hunger.
Because of the tremendous hunger  you know  we'r e talking about hu ngry people.
Yes  I thought it was just a labor camp  and right away they took care of me  I didn't have to suffer any hunger  nobody was beating me up  you know  and we didn't have to work even  it was only Auschwitz was only a passing.
I was aware that hunger was still a matter to deal with  and  but I was not quite aware of the political atmosphere at that time.
Indifference causes children to be killed and causes hunger and I think we all need to care.
NESSE GODIN Page 11 SWB: And in the hospital was there a hunger strike.
I mean  we were hungry  very hungry  because the food was very -- this was very little food there.
And I I I couldnt I couldnt stop  my father just died of hunger.
And my mother died on the 30 th of July 1942 of hunger.
He not got it for money; got it for food  for hunger.
You could not go to a store and buy anything because it wasn't being sold to Jews  so there was a little 4 bit of hunger already.
So first of all  the rations that the Germ ans gave to feed the inmates was a ration for starvation.
You know  the Germans took over the e -- the end of June  a-and this was right then and there  so what  you know?
My head were blank after that  I got hit with a lead pipe and I had from hunger and thirst we were just you couldnt think straight.
And I have seen other people pick up those which were taken out and chewed over by other people and take it just because of the hunger cause they had nothing really to eat.
At that time  it had another purpose  i-it helped not to feel the hunger pains.
Well  there was over four years terrible hard work and far away from from family and with strange people  and most of them was uh were hardened with hunger because it was...everyday was uh think about uh bad...was was uh hunger all the time because it was very short of food.
The poor people on those islands who suffered hunger anyway  they wanted to say they surrendered to whoever comes.
Not -- not two major problems and only a million others when you feared for your life every second  but the daily hunger and the lice  that was like a -- something never left you  never for a second.
The people were as good for you as they could be because with them there was also great hunger which was readily apparent.
Because those people were deported to those areas in during that famine.
We went through three years of dehumanization  deprivation  hunger and everything  and you know what ------------------maybe.
I remember duri ng the time of famine in the Warsaw Ghetto in 1941 that the children would just go in groups on the streets  after the curfew; I think the curfew was 8 p.m. But it was not dark yet during the su mmer months so they would walk on the streets barefoot with the swollen legs and beg for alms and beg for food.
But we -- we were hungry but we were not starved.
07:14:50 And  I remember once  I don't know for what reason  the DPs went on a hunger strike protesting something.
I believe that once one has experienced hunger  they will never ever forget it.
So you started to nibble a piece now  put it in your pocket  didn't last  the hunger was so great.
But they -- it's very hard for somebody understand to see his parents  and almost yourself dying hunger death.
And it took awhile  I would say it took a couple of weeks at least  but I was always hungry.
People died in tremendous 11 numbers of exposure  of hunger  everything else.
But I also remem -- remember  that was 18 in 41  when there was a famine  and I remember it very clear.
Oh yeah  we were hungry  and that there was a terrible thing there.
Most probably due to hunger and the strain and stress and eventually  there was a doctor on the train  the last doctor that I knew in Karlsruhe and he gave me a handful of sleeping pills to give to my grandmother and I did.
So  they went back and forth and on the end  the Germans.
Altogether the ration was bread which wasnt edible but [indecipherable] it was more sent that it was bread  but we didnt suffer hunger.
Not interested  only to satisfy them  our hunger  because when the war broke out  right away everything was all the stores were closed.
Ah  then the next episode I do recall was sending daily the 5 000 men and women to build the runways for the German airforce and theres nothing wrong building a highway or a runway  but it is absolutely beyond your comprehension what means to be constantly hunger without having proper clothes and being beaten up and cursed by the guards.
