To pass  that village was so small that it had a school with only one classroom.
In my town  you know  because I was involved in going to school  public school  because I was not a softie  I was one of theirs  they couldn't fight with me; I'd fight back.
Also  they went to school  so we have to meet after school.
And I went and registered into the vocational school  and I took a course in sewing.
But  I mean  they didn't tell us that anything horrible was going to happen to us if we continued to go to school or anyt hing like that.
>> Josie Traum: Well  the first day coming out of school  there was a gang of girls waiting for me  and they beat me up.
Now first I didnt know it at the time  and my parents never told me  but recently  a dean of a medical school found the letter from the head of the internal medicine  to my father  telling him his fellowship was there  and he could come on such and such a time  and what it was.
>> Bill Benson: When you first arrived and went to school  you had a really tough experience.
I think it actually– I think the school year may have begun or you begin school at Easter time.
All my friends  all my school friends except this one girl  and I was not friendly...uh she did not become a close friend of mine until I went into high school.
I we -- I went on to Columbia University  wh ere I finished the engineer -- school of engineering  then -- civil engineering.
And -- an-and one other incident is  when my daughter was in high school  her social worker called me and she told me  ﬁYou know Mrs. Klein  I had to call you because your daughter is very unhappy and -- and -- and I have to talk to you because she tells me that she i -- when she is home  she always has to be happy.
And and had you this was a classmate  so had you been in school with him through June  or is that an No  no  not Jewish.
And I graduated from Beverly Hills High School; and imme diately went to St. Louis  went back to my parents and went to Washington University.
Yes  there was a Jewish elementary school that my fam ily was not allowed to attend because my father was an anti-zionist.
Now  I don't know where you folks are from  but also when I speak to groups I find people from smaller communities where 12 000 represents the whole city or the whole town or represents their school.
And was your father did your father have any strong political kinds of leanings that you would be sent to such a school?
yeah  we had to go to Hebrew school in the morning  an hour before regular school because the the Christian children  they also had an hour Of religious education?
No  no  nobodys together  because my brot her immediately went to study in Zurich  my sister went to study medi cine and so on in Basel  you know  and I stayed one year in a boarding school near Zurich.
And they were not educated people  bu t they smart my mother was she got seven c-classes of grammar school  so it was much more than most of the people there.
So my guardian said  okay  she will pay for the school  and as far as I remember  she said she would pay him maintenance for me.
A2: My grandmothers I spoke German before I went to school.
I never started school or anything else in Krakow  because we were ready to move  and the war broke out in September before th e school year started.
Thats my sister when she we nt to school right after the war.
It was only in later years that I found a copy of my mother's report cards in elementary school  she was definitely a C student all the way  which I thought was quite extraordinary.
So 2 High school (German) 4 she suffered actually more than I did.
Therefore  to afford to go to high school  you had to had support of a family that could afford it.
And there we did join a synagogue  Beth Jacob synagogue and I went to Hebrew school.
You know  is be it comes to that they they they really was thinking  that they been so nice teachers we have in you know  at school  and we have in Girl Scouts  and and you know  really nice  you know.
And while at the Law School I didn't do too well except that I organized the Harvard Law School Union and became its first president.
In fact he even wanted me to go to a Jewish day school but my mother didnt want me to go because we werent that religious and in those days it was just orthodox schools.
And my mother ca lled me on -- around nine oclock  nine USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0015 55 thirty  I should leave the school now and go to Heidelberg.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 6 >> Bill Benson: The same school together?
Interview with Kitty Weiss Penner 41 I remember going to pick up my sister at school  with my mother.
And as I me ntioned before  the pres -- the principal of that high school was Dr. Ludwig Karpen and he -- whether it was he who had the original idea  or whether by virtue of the great influx of these children  that class was formed  I could not answer you this question.
Well they they must have because they sent me to a a religious type of school.
Through my entire school ye ar  elementary as well as high school  I had two hours a week religion -- relig ion classes  conducted by a rabbi.
Now that you mention getting married  at this point  youre working  youre going to school  then you have a stint in the military.
And I started going to school a little bit and then I returned to the United States in 1947.
I was smart enough to understand it from my school years when those subjects were taught in school about what Capitalism is and what Socialism is.
The school was not far from  when she leaves the school  came to the hospital  we went to the cantina  after cantina  we went to the swimming pool in the hos pital  went back  go the neighbors  listen to radio  it was  my husband came home  he called me during the week and was very easy.
And then not from that  I jumped to the high school.
The fi rst time that I went to school was after we came back to Kovno  after the liberation from the ghetto  after living in to that hole  then I had school for about six months  but other than that  no we  I didn't go to any school  it was all da y long you were out in the street.
I think there were only 11 of us  because this was the beginning of a school there  we were always the eldest we were se nior class in yeshiva  right.
When I was enrolled in this school and the teacher asked me what my name was I said it was Rifca and he said to me  well  I have two other Rifcas in this class.
Again  it was always in the company of the friends with who I went to Hebrew school and who were my  so to say  also members of the Zionist youth group and we were recollecting  you know  reminiscing the wonderful days that we had.
So now  when I came to Chicago  and I must make it -- I went to high school -- I went to one of the best high sch ools at the time that it was  it was in Austin High.
Instead of that he went to the same Saint Petersburg  and there was a gymnasium  so-called  high school  which was called Saint Catherines.
I cannot even begin to tell you and I dont know how I wanted so much to go to school.
So I had great incentive every single day we had lessons and I would go after I had studied the lesson  you go to school all day and then you h ave to learn your homework and then I had to go see Mrs. Lake every day and recite my homework.
I was in a school for boys and my sisters in the school for girls.
And uh  I was admitted to the high school  what was for a Jewish boy at that time quite difficult.
But anyway  Jeanette came with me to junior high school  even though she was older  so I think the choice was mainly a choice of knowledge  rather than exactly age.
Stealing my mother's very scarce sugar and putting it into the gas tanks of the German trucks that were parked in the street in the front of my school.
They went to religious school  I went with them to the temple.
Then we went to Nairobi and we went to school there.
Did -- did they learn about the Holoca ust  or the -- the second World War in -- in school in any detail?
You know in the Catholic school especially they had a lot of religion and of course we didn't go.
I didnt know what city or what town this was in  but when we arrived  it was getting towards the evening and the Nazis had told us that theyll put us up in this abandoned school building or something  or railroad station.
And then on Monday he had to be no  Sunday night he had to be taken back to the New York School for the Deaf.
Wed go after school and cut wood to to get some money  or go for cr anberry picking cran berry in the deep in the woods  to sell  so we will get few ca cents  you know  for that.
But I was fluent in Dutch and of course  you know  in school.
They decided to keep the school open another two months -- do -- two weeks or three weeks  I dont remember what.
He sent his kids to -- there we re several Jewish school systems in Poland as you know.
I finished the high school  by 19 29  in age of 16 and I passed exams to th e University of Medical School  and military Medical School  too and in 1935 I was a doctor  and second lieutenant of the Greek army.
How did you feel that school was closed  was that upsetting to you?
This was not the bishop who was the principal at the high school  but the gardener at the bishop's palace.
And she learned German in Brussels at the school  not in Germany.
Can you imagine at that age  we just finished high school  all of us  and it -- its awful.
Since we did not walk around with that red scarf  they know that we are dumb or we didn't do much  well  in school.
Although I never did sp eak to my children about it  I did speak to high school students at the Jewish Federation and I became a docent at the Museum of the Holoca ust in L.A.  in Los Angeles.
In 43 I graduated in high school with excellences  all the best grades.
Both times the the people there asked us to speak to some school groups.
And strangely enough  I dont remember -- I guess we had almost nothing to wear  so I wasnt really conscious of -- of what I was wearing  because I recollect the things I wore in Paris and things that I wore in Vienna and then a lot of my clothes at that time  and definitely the brown stockings and the -- an d the -- and the other -- in the school  but Interview with Dorrit L. Ostberg July 29  2000 54I dont recollect my attire at all at that time.
Somehow or another  like I say  I used to love school before and I was very good.
I did go back to school because I thought let me finish one thing that I started.
Well they just said you know you cant stay in this school anymore.
So  he finished  that was junior high school and I cannot talk forever about anything.
And for 25 years  and the last four years of those 25 years I was assistant director of the sc -- school.
And ironically enough  even as I got a job in public health nursing and put myself through school  I used the German lan I had to use the German language to be in a clinic  to interpret to German refugees in Toronto  Canada   of what to do with their babies.
You can imagine that when we had physical training lessons in school and they discovered that this guy wore some very strange things under his underwear.
I-I t was called -- I -- I can tell you what it was called  Prinsagetten Temple  which was a synagogue  and they had a school.
I was supposed to go to school but I never did.
I didnt know a soul in Berlin  and -- but thats -- got slowly used to it and I did pretty well in school there.
He had a chau -chauffeur come and pick pick him pick him up from school.
And when I went through e lementary school  I think I must have been a little bit different and it was largely the teachers who would say to the children that I was from Vienna.
You know  school has Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 22 finished.
So actually  I had approximately half hour time between finishing in cheder  and going to public school.
It was very difficult thing because in that school I met a gi rl that I was in school in Lille and she knew my real name.
I had a nanny  a village woman  who took care of me when mother taught until I went to school at the age of 6 which was...required special permission because children were not sent to school until they were 7 in those days.
Because I finished school and my sister was still in school  otherwise we would go together.
But I imagine after two years your Hebrew was much [indecipherable] Was much better  right  and then I went ow -- enrolled -- they enrolled me in fifth grade elementary school.
So we sold the furniture from two rooms  one with a big dining room and fancy one which we only used on state occasions  when the American family came to visit us  we had dinner there and the other one was the living room and so the bed was in there and for some reason  my father kept that math book from the Czech school and he stuck it into that bed and when they came searching  they tossed everything apart and they came on the book.
Your memory is probably not too bad for high school days.
Yeah  yeah  yeah  he was Now tell me  did he go to higher educati on  did he finish hi gh school and go to college?
>> Bill Benson: You started school at a really early age.
And mostly were of the same with families that were in the same political and connected with the Jewish school.
So from that point of view  I had an opportunity to do things during those unus ual periods of time  which the only other time I was able to express my interest in being Jewish is when I took a job for five years to establish a school of social work in Haifa University  and they needed an outside person who was not involved in Israeli politics.
But my father said no  you you cannot be there  you have to go to school .
She chose this path  she wanted  and this was the best school.
His older brother Ferenc  even in high school  became very mu ch in-involved with literature and journalism.
This was the only secondary school   high school in town.
When she was 16  she quit school  and ac-actually  when she quit school  she went to work in a record store.
I had in that school there were quite a few Jews  but we were -- most of the kids were Catholic.
And I did ok in school and thats how I  and then a fter Describe the school for me.
I went to school and I looked through Harry Alexander 11 October 11  1995 Page 11 the papers and I saw watchmaking.
For elementary school children  for high school children  so they can see that there is strength and when you have belief  that helps and you can do -- you -- you ca -- you can do a lot of things when you have to.
It happens that that school is only about three or four blocks away from my grandparent's house  which is the main reason why everybody went there.
And then there was the Jewish center next door  and the bottom floor was the Jewish school where the rabbi taught the various grades of Jewish children  from th e community  you know?
This for me was the biggest blow  because when September came and I looked out of the window and I saw my friends are going to school and I had to remain home  this was a big pain for me.
It was a very tough experience because when you are at a boarding school away from your parents  a long way away from your parents  school di scipline is quite tough  but as I say  I wouldn't have missed it.
So youre a high school student at a school that is now a Russian?
This school did not only teach agriculture  it also taught homemaking and all sorts of other things.
They took one of the schools that the city I think gave them and they made it into a Jewish day school.
Now the music wasnt much in the school itself  but what we did was we used to go -- you know  we were in -- th-the German theater was brought back right after the war  in East Germany.
But  there were teachers and I had a teacher  I dont even know if he had any political conviction  but he was a human being and he always tried to mitigate any law  anything  but  but as a child  for example  even  even in middle school  I had to go once a week to three hours of  of labor  battalion practice.
Six years primary education  six years high school  and then six or seven years university.
Also  when we got back to New York  about which we will speak later  my father insisted that Jane go to a Sunday school in USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0078 64New York  a Jewish Sunday school.
Used textbook  high school textbooks and after work  I locked myself in my room and I read many of the books that are required from high school kids to be read.
We spoke German at home  but I had learned to read Romanian and to speak Romanian  and I also later learned some Russian  even before -- before school.
Its always been an important part of my life and since then I have been lecturing all over because its the only school of social in the country which offers it  which is unusual.
B ecause after school   my school was til 6:00 and we had a long day because we had to accomplish a lot and because I belonged to a Zionist organization I still went to a you know a get together from the Zionist organization and Jews had to be home by 8:00 and I would  you know I didnt want to you know we had nice band with all these young people.
That -- that still maybe Id -- I was not so mmature in my political views as I-I was later  bu t -- but still I m -- I was not -- I personally -- it affected very much the life of the adults  but no t so much maybe my own life  because I went to school  I fought with the Zionists there  I dont know.
And  you know  sort of trying to bring in a kind of family thing for the children so it wasnt just a school.
I was going to school  public school but I always had to work because money was always tight.
So one of those boys  my friend from school  his brother was taken by the Germans as a truckdriver to take the people from the town to Chelmo.
I just used it for the conservatory and for the ballet school  but I didnt use it for the high school  and I was too young to use it for university.
And he wrote that we have a ne w principal in school.
1937  we were no longer allowed to to go to public school.
I went to school and in front of school there was the SR  the b rown shirts  were standing in front of school on each side of the door  each one holding a German Shepherd with a muzzle.
She finished school at 14 and then joined the British Women's Army when she was old enough to do that.
And the second year -- that was 1941  '42 -- since life was -- was more normal  I went back to a school -- not in Paris  but in   which is about 32  35 kilometers outside of Paris  where I went during the first year of the war -- from 1939.
And we moved to a school  but from the school we moved somewhere else  I just don't remember the street.
So that essentially under the sponsorship of the Jewish community  there was a Jewish school with exclusively Jewish kids.
And that was in 1957  shortly before I graduated from school.
I graduated their high school at 16 and then their college at 20 and at 20 also received a Hebrew teachers diploma  and a diploma from the Hebrew University of Je rusalem in proficiency in the Hebrew language  and learned Yiddish and -- and received a Bachelor of Hebrew literature  as well as a Bachelor of Arts  before I went to medical school.
No sm ells  no sights  we didnt go anywhere  it was just the snow in hut and the little narrow walkway to the school and from the school  and thats all I remember from that.
I mean  it sounds as if for you  when you were at the Pavellas  it was not a difficult time  perhaps because you -- I mean  it was difficult in the se nse that it was -- you couldnt go to school  but that -- maybe Im wrong in sayi ng it was not difficult  but not painfully difficult like the time when you were abandoned and alone.
This was really a very sad situation because the whole class fell apart when the all 45 children  some went to one school that was teaching Pole...in Polish.
I remember I went to school  and the teacher said  do you know what day this is?
Youre going to a Polish school  you speak Polish  so you can -- you can be proficient in your school.ﬂ Thats why I -- Yiddish  I had relear -- learn Yiddish  actually.
I know these are not school children but tell your children that: Don't bully anybody.
My school -- my apartment was number 13 on the street.
Until it came to Dr. Serrett   who was a very famous psychiatrist for the National School s of Social Work.
I had an 80th anniversary  I had two couples which I know from Interview with Samuel Marein-Efron May 8  2013 55 From a very long time Since primary school  I think  come.
But she didnt after I left and went back to London   she arranged to have me go and be admitted to the top elite school in northern Ireland   the Eaton of northern Ireland   and I spent a year and a half there  being a normal schoolboy.
When you first started seeing each other  was he go ing to school at that time  to study in Germany?
Now  when you were in high school  Hitler was already in power.
Well  we made it into the next town and there were signs all over for the refugees  you know  we can go to the next  to the school.
And they consisted fi -- of a number of high school teachers from Martinique  from very -- from African high schools and so on.
And there were a number of people in the school system who understood that this law was really a good law.
I didn't witness any particular ones but they -- they did pick on some people and certainly in -- later on in Kristallnacht I went to school that day and I was late  you know  leaving late but then the school was closed so I went back home again and everything was -- windows were broken on all kinds of stores.
In 1941  I graduated high school  then 1942  headed for college.
If somebody didnt go to this school  they they had all sorts of things  so schooling was an impor tant thing.
And I went to school there until the famous Crystal Night 6 of 1938 which was the end of school and basically for all German-Jewish children.
He is the one who decided that I would attend a secondary school known as a gymnasium where one of the foreign languages was Latin.
She then went to work in the Hebrew afternoon school system.
She was from Czechoslovakia if I am not mistaken  and I men tioned to her my qualifications  and that I finished high school  and had my graduation papers  and what my background is  that I could be helpful to her  and she accepted that   and for awhile I was working there  and I was  of course  cleaning and washing the floor from the wrong end.
I went in and I put the knee socks underneath my stockings and I went to school.
You see  this goes back to the background in high school.
And  I still remember some of my teachers and uh -- that was not .. I think the school was very good.
And he went to the University of New Hampshire for graduate school in chemistry.
I had started a swimming school in Peru and I was coach of what they call the Peruvian Olympic team.
So  since you were born in 1922  when did you start high school  or gymnasium?
But not hectic the way -- I mean  I have a lot of -- I spent most of my USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0043 41 career as a faculty member at Boston Biomedical and then The Eye Research Institute  and always with an appointment at Harvard Medical School  and so I dont -- Im not like your average Harvard tenured professor  whose life is very limited to getting ahead  doing [indecipherable]  you know  [indeciph erable] you know  and not -- not doing anything else.
And I was 17 when I finished school  and we had a very extended family and we lived -- you know  we were very close to my grandparents.
He was going to school  Art was  and he was working at Boeing on the fields.
I mean they  we lived in a house near the school and the Germans requisitioned that  and then we moved to another house and then we moved to another house  but that was because the Germans just you know  when they when they wanted houses they just kicked people out.
But I -- I think they basically said that I was too mature to stay in high school and I just didn't fit in  which is an in teresting way  I suppose  to put it.
Went to summer school again the following year  and that way I got even with others in my age group.
And -- Im sorry -- and -- and of course  a -- the school had to practice strict blackout.
How the Hell he got (pardon the expression) got into medicine school to this day I do not know  with his qualifications  but he got in.
When our son was old enough to go to school  they didnt teach anything about the Holocaust.
Now quickly  22 years later my wife  my two sons  and I met my former teacher from the Waldorf School in New York.
I started -- well  I was accepted at Columbia  because they were one of the -- Columbia graduate school  that they were one of the few schools that had a course in comparative literature at the time.
I dont -- Except she very quickly tried to get you out of that school.
And I started -- then we compromised and in the 1 Liberal arts high school (German) 2 The sixth grade level in German Gymnasiums (German) 3 High school graduation examination (German) 4 Hermann Goring 3 beginning of 19-- immediately at the first few days of 1938  I went into a private  commercial language school where I had French and I had English.
And I did not really see much of mobs because I was in school at eight o'clock.
And I traveled back to school throughout the whole night because the railroads were bombed  and I had to change two or three trains  and I slept while waiting for the next train  I just slept on the bench and the station master knew me  and the gave me some blankets  army blankets to cover myself up because it was cold.
I enjoy working with groups  school groups mostly  where we go a little deeper into the the subject matter  and Im particularly i-interested in the questions the kids ask.
Uh by uh early 1941 the Jewish school had to collapse itself  all of its grades  into a small classroom.
I was interviewed by a young man who was a school teacher in New York  and he put me on.
My last year in high school I took -- also they put me in French  French so I could learn English.
Yeah  I went to Strader and I went to school  public school  and the Russian school  and . . .
open the ra -- the school was -- I loved this school  loved the -- the -- we had good friends.
Well together in the sense that  you know  if we were not going out of town  if we were not going to be going out of town and staying in New York  then  in terms of Ivy League schools or the top of the heap  there was Columbia and  and since we were not going to be able to dorm  most of the people who graduated with us  if they did not dorm  went on to Queen's College   you know  in their backyards and then  you know  lived at home  if you're going to liv e at home  that was as close as we came  so  yeah we were together  but that was really not because we were together  it's because we both were able to qualify for top schools and  and that was the top school  certainly within commu ting distance  I commuted every day  it was more than USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0001 43 an hour each way.
But Interview with Jonas Mekas June 29  2018 83 then there was another  assigned a ka general political supervisor of the gymnasium  of the high school.
You are going through school and you said the teacher made that comment to you and you came home to your father and talked about leaving.
So then -- then he was at school here  and the -- both sons  I said  ﬁIf you are in the door  in the house  its only Dutch spoken.
Right after he came home the word came out that Jews are not allowed to go to public school any more.
And I took a part time job and I got my divorce  and I went back to school to become a -- a schoolteacher and I was -- I taught mathematics for about 20 years.
And I finished  the middle school  called middle school  maybe till around 14 years or 15 years.
Of course  we still went to school for a couple of months and...uh...but as...uh... time went on  the Germans started occupying...occupying...uh...pri...buildings that...like school buildings  offices  government offices  and so on  and they settled themselves in our school.
>> Halina Peabody: So I guess and so I went to school and my mother said she was going to find  you know  some -- some work because she had no money  nothing on her.
And I find that when I talk to the groups of young people  they are just starved for my words  they because they dont get it at home  they dont get it in school.
He is now the president of the -- what is the Jewish university -- A school -- Brandeis?
Now  I was told that when the communists came in Romania  she worked as a custodian in the school or something.
As a matter of fact  when we started school  I flunked the first year because I never did my home work.
So we had some difficult times right after we got married because to him it was certainly much more enticing to transfer to a medical school  get an American degree and have not to deal with any of this foreign business.
So we only could go to school maybe two hours a week or three hours a week in shifts.
And well  the farms  my uncles farms were okay  but I had to go to school  so I will not have stayed in the village anyway.
That school was  to me it was a Godsend  when I went in there.
So his he had family here and they werent too nice to me but I frankly didnt realize that until I understood a little bit more but they sent me to the Americanization school.
There are Jewish schools  and all -- they ar e  all three of them  Sarah  Rebecca and Alana  and going to the same Jewish school in -- in New Jersey.
technical interruption] Before we go into school  I wanted to dwell a little bit more about your family.
It was a private school  a Yushiva  an Or thodox Jewish school.
I never heard it in my life.ﬂ And she was very upset  and she spoke to the high school teacher there and she said  ﬁHow about if she would come to school?ﬂ I says  ﬁI cannot talk.
There were basically none  other than refugee kids in that school.
And the high school is trying to figure out what to do with us  cause we dont speak English and theres nobody there  no tutors  nothing.
And when we came to Poland I -- I didnt speak Polish yet  and I remember later -- later [indecipherable] in -- in school that was a poli -- teacher of Polish  and he reminded me all the time that I am -- that I am putting the -- the senten ces in a way Russians put it.
Whatever I had  I we nt to the I when I moved  I wen they wanted to go to school   to public school  and I didnt know where I live now.
And I cried and went home and was like  I'm not going to school any more unless you cut my hair.
I had a very nice time and wed go USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0024 25 home every few weeks for a weekend and in turn would be invited at some newly made friends home for a weekend and it was a ra ther posh school.
And the people who went to this school were paid for  but all the relatives who came  we all paid for ourselves.
As I told you  there was a school at the Jewish Community Center what was teaching newcomers English.
When you werent in school   what did you do for fun?
So my mother decided that I had to go b ack to high school.
In the town that we lived in there was no Jewish day school.
Well  I I breezed through this whole thing like nobodys business and then then came to cadet school  and there I was quite determined to be a nonconformist and a rebel when nonsense was being talked about  you know  pamphlet stuff  and which often is is outdated and and and has been written  who knows for whom  and and I would I would say well  for instance a question.
I spoke in a school in Staten Island several weeks ago.
Usually I went very early before going to the school  and I helped some German farmers to put vegetables on the market.
And then I finished there; because  in our town  wasn't able...I wasn't able to study for kindergarten teacher because there wasn't school .
Interview with Adam Szymel January 25  2015 10 My mother si went to school as a little girl in in Torzhetz and later in Russia.
I dont know anything about Hungarian in school Š my schooling was Romanian .
I want to -- I want to rewind a little bit  conceptually and go back to  you were in graduate school  what was your specialty in engineering?
I didnt agree with her because I hadnt -- I-I ha dnt felt any until the very last year  I used to pick up two friends along the way to school.
I attended -- this was the compromise  because there were no day schools and I had to go to school.
First of all  I didn't go to school but for oth er reasons  because my mother was afraid to send me to school.
But the only good thing about it  he had  under the bill of rights  GI Bill of Rights  he could go to school and they paid the tuition.
And anyhow  he r children -- she had a number of children that went into the school  so she introduce a program that could do without the teachers.
So are you taken out of school in order to -- Yes. --
And one of the very first things my parents did when I came home from school one day  they said we are going to the department store  something we don't have anymore.
So I said  cant really  because I have not finished high school  I was still three years short.
Right now I still want to learn a little bit more about what your life was like when you finished school.
So all the Jewish kids in the neighborhood like my friend and her brother and myself and my brother and some friends would go to that particular school that was organized  and I couldn't say goodbye to my friends in the previous school  so in  I believe in September or so of 1941 we all walked...we kind of started walking and we picked up these kids up to go to school because it took us quite a while.
When I was 6 years old instead of going to school  I had to work with my father.
But then the kids go back to school and go and listen to their rock and roll music and figure it is far away  it's not where we are; it's not going to happen to us  we are human beings.
My mother had very good German from school and she had passable French.
No I the only reason I mention it is that it really there is a a school right near my home in Virginia that recently had the name of a confederate general Yeah.
We had only the four primary schooling  that Jewish school  primary classes and beyond that we would prepare at home with instructors and travel 40  50 kilometers to the nearest larger city  Iasi  to be examined and qualified for higher grades.
The school was a little hut with wa with two rooms.
They right away went to school  started learning English and the history  because they wanted to become citizens.
I know knew more English than kids who go to American high school and take two years of anything.
And I didnt know until after was in– and Sue went to law school and had a difficult time as an Appalachian student for a couple of years.
And we were...the same teachers were permitted to continue to teach and we were allowed to return to school  encouraged to return to school.
And she was by that time a very highly- qua lified and very experienced nursery school teacher and so she came and looke d after the -- because we had a lot of children of all ages   little children in the camp  she set up th e nursery school in the camp and she set it up so well that th e UNRA  United Nations Rehabilitation Agency  were running a lot of the camps  came to our camp and saw the nursery school and borrowed her and sent her to other camps to se t up nursery schools.
And thanks to him  Sobib or came out  the story came out  the world knows what's happened  and  and it's written about it  and people  uh  and t he book is translated to so many languages  and children learn in school thanks to that.
Interview with Helen Schwartz March 1  2010 30 Junior high school  yeah.
Was this a regular public school  a mixed public school  or not?
So that although my diploma didnt come til June of 48  in fact  I finished my four years in January  took a semester and a summer session in Albany   and then went to the University of Chicago for graduate work  because by this time  the G.I. bill led me to think of the possibility  not of teaching secondary school  as I had originally planned  and I had done my practice teaching in the ninth grade  but the possibility of getting a PhD and going into college teaching.
But other than that  I was always going  for instance  the primary school that I went to  the prep school so to speak was a Hebrew academy  one of the most modern of its kind and had a religious orientation.
So I just was sent to school  like like all the other children  but I was I was sent to the third elementary school  which served the the children who lived in the outskirts of the city and the surrounding villages.
My next memory of is I remember sitting in either the first or second grade elementary school and going there for maybe a half of year when a ll of a sudden I had to stop going.
The father sent them all to syn -- to -- to Hebrew school  even the girls were -- went to Hebrew school.
Was it a Jewish school or a private school or a technical school?
And she put me when I was six years old  she put me to school  and she bought me the big -- what you have when you go to school  how do you say  the sac d'etude.
Even the nurses from the school were take n out of the ghetto for work to the hospital  18 even to the German hospital.
Im trying to get a sense of if your friends were Jewish  if your friends were mixed  did you go to a public school  and that sort of -- I -- the first school I went to was a German school.
I couldnt stay  so they put me in there  more than to go in another high school.
She was 20 years old  a school teacher and someone said kids were disappearing  Jewish kids.
My son Andre finished at that time  the [i ndecipherable] technical school.
The older girls were sent to high school and the younger girls were in school .
And I went through the Workman's Circle elementary schools  high school  and even into their sem the seminary for several years.
Well everything you know you go to school  you make friends.
My grandfather  for example  served as a teacher of religion  as a translator and so on  even in the public school and in courts.
And after his graduating... Well he took  you see he  he  my mother had  my mother's brother in Israel  Elias had been trained as an engineer and my mother got it into her head early on  she used to tell  Freddy used to be found with hammers and nails and taking things apart and exploring so she always said he's going to be an engineer just like her brother and I guess that stuck in his mind and he in fact took a five year engineering program at Columbia and  which they were ab le to do in four years  he came out with a BS instead of a BA  having done two years in the engineering school and he graduated with an engineering degree as  so yes  then he graduated the year after me and he announced that he was going to get married to that young lady  who name is Rachel and she is his wife today  they have three children  live in New Jersey  Cherry Hill  New Jersey and that is where he has lived  really since he graduated  he  at the end of college the recruiters came and Freddy accepted a job with RCA which was in Camden  New Jersey.
But I -- I decided I was not going to go back to school full time.
But the one that I mentioned  my fath ers brothers -- the Plachtes  she had problems in her school  too  but I dont remember what they really were.
Probably instead of going to night school I would have been going to a regular school  and I would have achieved self actualization stage at a much earlier age.
and we went to uh a bldg  which used to be my high school before the war  from which I gra duated.
The only first time in 1942  I had a very good voice and the conductor in Vilnius in the symphony -- what we had in Vilnius  we had a musical outfit  I -- if I would know the name -- anyway  I joined the choir and the conductor was my music teacher in high school  and couple of days after we had rehearsals he me t me on the street and he said  Ada  dont come any more.
They hadnt gone to technical school  and they had no training in occupations.
A woman who couldn't read and write  never went to a school  never know what a map means  managed to go from Janova to Kovno.
When I met this man  he was Professor at Berlin Law School  Berlin University.
Well  after school -- I think she would wait for us at sc-school  and we had to go on long wa -- take long walks.
And this taught me someone later on af sometime in the 60s  I think he was in the secret police  I am not sure  but I knew he I went to school with him.
I-I dont f -- you know  I -- when I was in elementary school I became -- I had -- I became very  very ill.
>> When your mother was working for the mayor and Jewish people were not allowed to go to school  where were you and your sister?
I want to go back to your school  where you say all of a sudden the children no longer play with yo u  no longer talk to you  and youre by yourself.
The principal gave her a girl from the eighth grade  and uh she was sitting with her one hour after school; and she teached her German and she teached her English.
And I finished the high school and then I had to decide if I want to go -- high school was a gymnasium there and then we decided we want to go to the university.
Ah yes  you ask me I -- I have many f -- I ha ve not very close friend  and I -- Jewish people this time before -- during school  because in a class was 40 people  50  and was two Jewish people  you know.
You see a public school in Poland was a little advanced  better rated than the United States public school.
Now  out of these 13 Holocaust survivors families  many of us never went to school.
I I I I didnt went to school when I was eight and 12 - 15.
Who did exercise at school  at [indecipherable] who was robust  and so on.
Did -- did you have any boyfriends when you were in boarding school?
My parents now spoke much more often in Russian in front of me for fear that I should not go to school and say something anti-Communist  and then be arrested because a child had said something.
And my daughter and my son  they were home and then there were like four of Black kids who were playing basketball with him  who were on -- from Central High School.
On Friday  every Friday  at 2:00  we all had to come home from school.
That was one of the reasons it was easier for me to attend that school because he was an officer  and I never thought being a daughter of an officer from the Polish army that I'll be treated in school the way I was treated.
And this is how I -- I was i-in Poland  til I went to high school.
Sold the house  wh ich was mine  and went to school  and learned how to be a court reporter.
>> Steve Fenves: As I said  I had academic high school but Jews sat in the back  never addressed by the teacher.
The I asked after sch one day of school  Ive told him first I liked it th ere  I was among students  it felt so good.
Yes  I went to -- to school in Czechoslovakia  in Kosheetza.
I had a new teacher and he -- was first day of school and again  could have been 1938 -- yes it had to be 1938 because I didnt go to school any more in ‚39.
This is a picture of my class  it's the fifth grade  the Jewish Elementary School and it says TR which means Treeadam   which means great fifth grade and I'm the pig-tails there on the right hand side and right next to me   looking at the picture from my point  is to the right  is my best friend who I was so looking for when I entered Auschwitz.
We had we had teachers  we had like a a like a school  without calling that by name school.
They were still pretty young and  uh  I went to nursery school and my mother helped my fath er in the store because  uh  it was growing and so she and  uh  and he and ran the store and my grandfather took care of me  and he was pretty much the one who was in charge of  uh  my growing up and he and I went walking together and I have very fond memories of my  as I called him my opa 1 and  uh  he was my mother's father and the only grandparent that I ever knew.
And so there was a great deal of competition for places in school  and American colleges  which of course the attendance expl oded as a result of that.
But I don't think that I will be true to mine brother  to my family of 300 from before the war  to my colleagues to our...to whic h I went to school  to my colleagues who later were the heroic fighters in the Warsaw ghetto  to the simple people  my neighbors who perished fo r...for nothing.
When I grew up  I went to a to public school.
Of course we learned in school Polish but uh we did not come in any contact and we  our business and our daily life had no mingling with the Polish people.
We came to Florence  and the first night when we came to Florence we slept in that magnificent Synagogue  but we slept in the Sunday school that was adjoining the Synagogue.
In September I left the Berchtesgarten area where we were picking these people up and then I went up to Wiesbaden where Eisenhower's headquarters were and I mentione d earlier that I went to law school and I became the law member of a general court which is like...the court itse lf is like a jury and the law member is the one who advises them on the law  and then I stayed there until the end of the year and then I came back to the United States.
Q. Did you go to school also in To rran and what did your parents do?
Did you go to a Jewish school  or just to a Polish school?
The amusing thing was I  having gone to -- going to a private high school in Yugoslavia pre-war  there must have been something wrong with you.
At the time we we Jewish kids were still going to the regular school.
Im six years old  I start school and I remember that.
I continued to go to school  nobody at school seemed to care about what was going on.
And because Mengele had been a doctor  of course...uh  you know  I shudder to even say the word because  you know  a a a sub-human being like that shouldn't use the word doctor even if he earned such a degree in school  but in any case he was a physician and so he lanced these boils inside of his mouth a number of times in order to to treat the abscess without having to go to a doctor  and because I'd been a professor of oral pathology and the head of the Department of Dental Diagnosis at the University of Kentucky and Kentucky is a a poor state in which in eastern Kentucky particularly  and in the days that I was there in the '60's  there were hundreds of people who who suffered from a lack of dental treatment  even in emergencies  and who would who would have these infections that normally in this country nowadays are treated automatically  uh they let them go for months and years at a time and I saw many patients who who would have abscesses that came and went and they never even had the tooth pulled where eventually the infection would break through the bone and enter the sinus above the teeth  you know  the sinuses we have in our head  and uh set up an infection inside the sinuses and then through that hole it would periodically drain  either inside the mouth or out  outside on the face  and so because Mrs. Stammer has said that he had several episodes of swollen jaws and face and I saw on this picture being projected on the wall that there was a hole in the bone in about that place and that there was a scar on the face on the spot where this what they call a fistulous track  the track where the infection drains out would have occurred and there was similar to what I had seen before with patients in Kentucky  that uh that may be a an important link.
So  he -- I dont know how this came up  but you know  at lunchtime we would talk about things and he came -- one day we st arted talking about religion and I -- I said  ﬁWell  you know  I mean  yeah  Im of Jewish origin  but ﬂ I said   ﬁI -- you know  that doesnt matter.ﬂ And he looked at me  he sa id  ﬁWhat are you talking about  that doesnt matter?ﬂ He said  ﬁThat matters a lot.ﬂ He said  ﬁDo you think  that as a woman  you would have gone to gr aduate school  if you werent Je wish?ﬂ And I said  ﬁWell ﬂ you know  ﬁthere are a lot of WA SP-y women out there who -- wh o do big important things.ﬂ And he said  ﬁWell  yes  but theyre not a lot and that actually  one of the things that USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0043 128 comes down to you  about being Jewish  is that there is  in the Jewish tradition  as in the Chinese tradition  there is a tradition of education.
Uh my parents  right when I graduated Russian school  uh decided to send me and my brother to Shanghai.
And the other uncles also  the other the other one was an Interview with Algimantas Gureckas October 14  2010 13educator  th-then he was a director of the high school  and the other was a lawyer  and then became a an attorney  a state attorney.
So I spend my first two years attending the first grade  second grade in this school on Ribna  and by the age of 10 my mother decided Im 21 big enough or bright enough or whatever  to be able to travel  take three different trolley cars  and I was signed in to a private Jewish school on Hermoska 48.
We learned a certain amount of political systems in school  but that was very dry  not in practice.
Al Munzer: Well  my two sisters were enrolled in a Catholic school as a way of hiding their Jewish identity.
>> Bill Benson: I was struck when you told me that almost right away there you are in English -speaking school  of course you don't speak English  and they're demanding that you sing \ God Save the King.\
He had to go to Switzerland to a boarding school for a while  but Rene loved it because he learned how to ski.
and you you go to  where was it  your school area  even though it hadnt begun  is this where you learned of it?
I went  no they were mixed  in the school it was mixed  but actually my first friend wasn't Jewish  but otherwise  later on   I had only Jewish friends.
We have a -- you know  my have very good friend  I have  Jewish  we didnt pay USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0074 13attention  th-theres no -- was no -- like in the school.
But anyway  I was spoiled and I had  I had always had an easy time in school.
And  so in order to do that  I couldn't stay in that  see that school was  as I said  in shambles  it was the remnants of a pre -war  very  very fine Jewish school  but because  so the system in Belgium was that if you went to public school  you could get into univers ity after graduation  you didn't need to take a special test.
I grew up in Washington   I went to all school in here.
There was no school any more  and there was no organiz -- organized life for Jews any more.
And you brought that to school and you were photographed with that  every -- every child.
But in Germany  the school also -- what I wanted to say  we lived in the barracks  the same barracks where the SS soldiers were trained.
I won't say much about the high school  but I will mention one thing.
And youll notice that both Paul and I went off to out of town school s. And the end of my four years at Interview with Harry Gelb December 13  2001 25Hamilton  I did move back to New York City  but I moved back here at that point largely because the law school th at had selected me  which was New York University was a fine institution.
After you came back to America for for your daughter to finish school  how long did you stay here?
And so did you go to school or did you stay I went to school for the two months.
My classmate from law school  Ju lius Chambers  who as I mentioned was my African-American classmate  had gone  was prac ticing in Charlotte  had become a very well known lawyer  who was eventually  in later years argued the Charlotte desegregation case in the Supreme Court.
It was -- it was a high school of almost 3 000 students  and the new public school  she was in a class of 120.
He was in  going to public school  not this Fall  but he was in a Baptist kindergarten and preschool.
Tell us something about the school you went to and the friends you had?
I remember my youth when I spent so me time in Romania  five years  where I was attending Talmud Torah and attending first grade of public school.
Oh well  I dont think I had much feeling  I just was raw and traumatic -- traumatized [indecipherable] And if you werent going to school  what did you start doing?
You know it was and then I came home and of course my uncle and aunt were very upset and but I was allowed to continue my school  my class.
You want to come in nursing school  you come in nursing sc hool.\
And it didnt matter  you know  cause my dads -- when my dad came to this country  he didnt have time to go to school and -- and he -- his English was with a very heavy accent  as we all have  but his  you know  he never really learned how to speak proper English  so to speak.
Well  I spent the -- I went to school in the daytime  to hotel school and in the evening I would come home  to what was then home  a foster home  if you will  to -- to those people that I stayed with.
And went on to Graduate school  and they just gave me fits all the way through.
What do you remember about starting school in the United States  in New York City?
I had one teacher in middle school who lost her husband and a son in the Second World War.
Well actually  Bologna is the first medical it was the first medical school in the world.
And I started then very soon I I worked  but I then after work from Wilson and company went to the evening school at IIT.
So my grandfather pushed me into a private school somehow and I enjoyed it.
So I told my husband about it and he thought it sounded good  it was certainly worth taking a chance  so we left New Mexico at the end of the school year and drove back to New York City.
And he grew up in a little town called Votice  in a t -- 12 years  he went to Prague to go to a high school  to a -- that time it was called [indecipherable]  which is for a s-scientist  like MIT or something like th at.
She was of Vendish blood  the Slavic tribe that lived in enclaves in Germany  and learned German only when she went to school.
I'm often asked in talks in school what affect this has had on -- on my faith.
I was thrown out of school when I was 14 years old in 1935.
Can you tell us in a few word s about your backgroun d  your  your family lif e  your school years in  in Czernowitz?
I used to walk with them to school and then there came a time when they said they wouldnt want to walk with me any more.
And so when when whenever we we would have one of these days where we would have to perform for the rest of the school  and everything was in teams  you know  you were on this team  and and you had to do things for the good of the team  and and all that.
But then they were not allowed to go to the school because Jewish kids were not allowed.
finished high school  and then did you then go on to college?
So  its 36  its 37  38– No  happy in high school and working very har d. Okay  yes  I began to be aware of them in 40 when France fell.
07:13:07 My little -- my daughter's daughter  she said like this and I have to tell you this  and on this I'm going to end  she said like this in school  sh e goes to a private school in Santa Monica  so there was a question  what your grandmother mean to you  so she  and she's nine years old  so she answered like this; 07:13:31 to think that I went from my mother  my mother went from her mother  from my grandmother  and that's the  all things that she had teaching me  she know from her mother.
Now  you must imagine  especially the kids in the school   suppose you had to move to  say  Mexico.
And I went to school  Jefferson Junior High School and then I went to East High School in Rochester and -- and my freshman year at Jefferson Junior High School  I met a lifelong friend named Joe Platt.
Even though he had a magna cum laude average  he couldn't  couldn't get in because people used to give them 100  100 000 dollars  you know  to  to get them into medical school  because that's what saved their lives you know.
So there for awhile I was out of school  there was no school.
And she went to another school  sort of a more orthodox high school cause she came from an orthodox home  and I went to a public school even though it was a Jewish school it was still a public school.
I really dont know why my parent s didnt accompany me to school but I suppose you cant do that every day anyways.
>> Bill Benson: And being a kid  besides hoping that the bombing would delay school  you also had a hobby of collecting shrapnel.
Usually they used to come to Florida for Thanksgiving and Christmas  but this year their daughter is going to DisneyWorld  or shes going to New York  I dont know  with a group from school  then she wont be back on time  then we decided well go for Thanksgiving there and for Christmas vacation  theyll come  probably  to port -- to Florida  to visit us.
They may -- And they knew us from home  so -- then I got  I told you  I got the -- through them  I got the jo -- so me of them lived in Chelsea and I got the job in the Hebrew school.
What were your parents saying to Joseph about continuing to go to school  or were there any safeguards being made?
But people used to come daily to Baranovichi from Chita  and I knew another family over there whose husband also the same age as my wife's and she was going to school in the same way.
None of it was the kind that No  I was not in danger exce except I had to be very  very careful  because I already we are not even ca came to that  that I got that under the ger very Interview with Jonas Mekas June 29  2018 146 soon  after the Germans came  and I moved back to school  I was asked also to to to to type those materials.
I remember when I went in school the day the war -- we heard the -- about the war  all the children -- the older children anyway  were telling us that people get killed in the war  that men leave their homes  and go to battle  they get injured.
We enjoyed our life and this was all a part of  I went to school when I was six years old  with my sister Pegilla   we went to Wonklis and we went to a Hebrew school and we went to a Polish school.
Illinois is very much a school where everybody lives on campus either in a sorority  fraternity  or a club and I was not in any of those.
They selected German Jews from each school to serve as group elders or as 11 chief of labor assignments and they -- that was thei r responsibility.
They always had a monk watching us in the school in th e corridor  so there would be no monkey sexual business or anything like this.
I went to the school but the door was closed and it was only for German children.
In the ghetto  was there any semblance of normal life -- were the kids still going to school -- Wasn't school  wasn't school.
He was the patron  we didn't have  as I said  parent-teacher associations  but what you had is patrons of the school.
It should be shown in high school  where they're old enough to understand that World War II should never happen again and that something like that should never  ever happen again.
And I liked the school overall and I made friends there.
Did you learn what were some of the things that you were learning in Hebrew school?
So we came to America and I enrolled in public school there.
And she had a son who was at school and she didn't want the son to know either because the son did know me and he knew that I was Jewish.
I mean  I walked to school by myself  and sometimes with friends.
They brought us to the town which is called Landskroner  and they put us in a school.
The teacher that taught me Hebrew in the Jewish school was hired.
So I went to the Polish school  but I was still studying English to finish the matriculation.
So sometimes they were dating people that were teachers in my school.
When you were in elementary school did the other children  American children ask you about where did you come from?
Now  my oldest daughter  Ann married a non-Jew  but she in -- her children go to Sunday school  and she is having her son Bar Mitzvahed  which I am very proud of her that she is doing that.
And theyre from eight to 16 in school in New York and all are very loving and caring human beings as I couldnt have wished for better.
And there was a school on the south coast in a little town called Swanage   which said  well Interview with Gerhard Weinberg March 13  2012 22 take two boys.
That was all the reading material and all of that that was what we learned in school  but mainly to read and write.
In school we were not allowed to -- to answer  because we were not allowed to know.
I have never -- I -- I look back on that  its a -- I think its a -- an Orthodox school  for one thing.
And when I s-scanned the list  I didnt see any na mes from my family  any at all  but I saw a name of my school girlfriend  and her ad dress  which was not too far.
Couldnt -- it was very hard to find anything until the Jewish organization bought a part of a school and converted that school into small rooms and a few large halls.
A family who went away to Panama before the war  one of the sons went to school in the defense.
Then they moved back to Bucharest  where he had a factory with another brother of his  textile factory  so then I went to school in Bucharest and then we lived in Bucharest until 1935.
I went to officers candidate school and after 90 days at Fort Knox  I got a commission as a second li eutenant.
You know  it was -- in the meantime we didnt know -- were not going to school.
>> Bill Benson: As you began to tell us  you were able to continue school until June 1942 and then the schools closed.
Uh  then worked for years as a custodian in a school in in in uh University City and worked as a gardener.
My mother  because Czechoslovakia once belongs to the Austria-Hungarian Empire  when my mother went to school  the language was Hungarian  okay?
We should remain calm and we woul dn't have school that day.
In Bremenhaven we were there in there they made like a staging area in a school  and the people you were stay ing there  they gave us to eat  but we couldnt leave.
Then the decision to go to graduate school was really  of course  mine  primarily  but I began to get encouragement from professors that I had in undergraduate school.
I was in the sixth grade  and the last thing I remember was pa ssing a test for junior high  and getting ready to get to return to school on September 1939.
So its 1942 - 43  and you are still going to this Jewish school?
I had to be in New York for the dance -- for my classes at the American School of Ballet and it was hard to get to and fro -- get the timing right.
And that's where my sister and I went  and then there was a boys' school that was like this Catholic school but only for boys.
And they had tick ets for the three of us to come to the Spanish riding school performance  and I should pick them up in the -- before 11 oclock on the performance on that day.
The school was fairly safe although there were searches at school  but they said it would be OK to send her.
My first tableau recollections are in Maastricht and since we arrived there in the year 1939 I would have been three and so my earliest tableau memories are really in a nursery school there learning colors with little fuzzy balls. (
We didnt go to the end no more to the school  because every day bombs falling on that  you couldnt go.
And I did go to school -- to Jewish school in Dortmund  because I couldnt go to public school in -- to any public school any more.
Then we did our - after that we did our equivalency  we went to school.
If the alarm sounded after 1:00  school started late and classes lasted 35 minutes.
There was a school there and the name was Adjibat and they there was a lot of food already  kitchens over there  setting up.
Not really  he was not  he was not of the  the school  the analytical school of Freud where you go back to your past  he wasn't really interested in my past  he was just interested in dealing with the present  you know.
So  you -- wh en -- how old were you when you started school?
And I went to school in Saint-Louis  both my sister and I did  in a local school there.
My school closed down Christmas when there was a [indecipherable] vacation  Christmas  38  and from then on it was -- tried very hard to get  generally  children out  and even if it was an opportunity open still.
And thats how I came here to Georgetown Dental School fo r a post-graduate course.
And then she got sick going to nursery school  so I quit  took care of her and thats it.
These our friends...the se are people we lived all our life together...were in school together and the business together and when...uh...when the war came  they kill us  as many as they could. (
Now  you said though that you did know that there were Polish children in your school  and for a little while there were classes in Polish.
But I think mainly I was so embittered of having to sit in junior high school  that was so much belo w my dignity that I really didnt take to anybody there.
I had a younger brother  who was three years younger than I was  and I suppose we could be considered an upper middle class family  because we had a lovely apartment and my brother and I went to a private school which was a rarity.
Eight years school and later on they couldn't send us to school because we had to work.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 6 >> Bil l Benson: At least you know you were in school  continuing your education during that time.
Im proud of myself that I could help even my grandchildren  not only my kids  with -- sc holastically  with their schools  since my memory  thanks God  was good  and I was always a good student in school.
Well  that was sort of a happenstance because he was sent as a chaplain  he was requested to come as a chaplain  in a small school for the blind in the southern part of Belgium called Hodbomo.
Of course  I didnt know exactly wh at college would be like  because in the Netherlands  when you graduate from the secondary school  you go to the university.
I was the youngest  my eldest sibling was a lawyer and perhaps that unconscio usly had some influence on my going to law school.
Josie returned to school and graduated from the Catholic University of America School of Social Work and began her career in child welfare.
Jay  I think  we nt to school just for a year  and then they run away.
Then  engineering school was five years long  instead of four years.
Just to think of all the eight years of school one could have skipped without supposedly any great loss of learning.
Not religious  they didn't go to religious school s. Bar Mitzvahed  Bat Mitzvahed?
I was at home   my mother didnt allow me to go to school  but my son -- my brother was i-in school  and sh e was so nervous about it.
There...there I was  you know  going to cheder and and nothing and and the whole town they had one school  you know.
I ba bysat  I -- I worked -- when I was in high USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0013 116 school  I worked.
And with all the stink I hear every so often  bullying in school and stuff  it's very important to know that a bully will pick whoever is the weakest or next to him.
And they taught us - they taught us to such a degree that when I went to public school  the transferred me immediately the first day because I could read and write already  and then I skipped again  because they were very good teachers and they were very good friends of our parents.
I was at first a part-time teacher and I taught in several schools  and eventually taught at the John F. Kennedy school.
So we were called in school       (laughter) because we were so...just a year apart  you know  and we looked alike.
So  if I werent such a dedicated pupil somehow  and always interested [phone ringing] [inaudible] So -- So I was -- I was kind of a goody-goody and I wa -- I always got to be the teachers pet  and I did all those right things and so I somehow got -- managed to keep interested in school  even though I already knew most of this stuff.
Were you still in a Protestant secti on of the school or was everybody together?
Interview with Vera Levine 13 February 7  2013 So you went  you just continued your jobs in a sense  commuting t o school and then youd come home and play with nonJewish children?
And then I was I graduated from high school in June of 41.
Did you loose the little accent that you had when you first went to school  so instead of speaking Polish?
I have a daughter that is educated  a school teacher  very intelligent.
And I only saw my mother  I pass when I went to school -- I went to school there  and then I passed the hospital and my mother  they put her near the window  and I could say hello  when years ago you couldnt go -- You couldnt go inside -- 7 -- as a kid  no. --
He came to my brothers school   which was my old day school  but I was -- this was last year  so I must have been -- was either -- I was either a sophomore or junior.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 29 Meanwhile  I'm in New York and I want to go to medical school and find out my other big surprise.
The law school was always the troublemaker  which is why I love it  and always different.
I attended grade schools which were run by  in Poland we didn't have separation state and church  and therefore the Polish grade schools were run by the Catholic lay teachers  nuns and priests  most of them...very few laymen teachers and I want to bring it out because we had schools on Saturdays  but me my parents being orthodox and we could not...my father would forbid us to attend Saturday schools  and what happened that this...the that the school on Saturday what we had they usually would take...they would take new subject on Saturday and I think it was because just in spite anti-Semitic overtones and anyway I would come in Monday back to school.
And then the next day  we were in a secret school.
Did you like to In the school I had only the worse marks.
So your school was Jewish   where you went to school?
So this is that same class  that last gra duating class in the high school that you talked about before  yes?
46 He -- I -- I dont know  he pretended it was a school  you know  it was very -- everything was very [indecipherable].
And if the parents could allow themselves  Interview with Go ldie Buch Jonas May 5  2013 4they also sent the children to Hebrew schools  and thats where I attended after public school; after lunch from one to five  we attended Hebrew school.
As I sa id  we were friends to the  you know  elite students of the school  th-the -- the -- the students -- What about when you were in college or law school  did people ask you about your background?
What else did they teach you in school beside s that Communism was a bad thing?
Things seemed slowly to return normal except that there were Germans there and in September school started agai n. There were air raids  there were bombings and all that but the Jews were not really bothered yet.
Yes  we were going still to school by ru Russian  yes.
We took the wounded German with us  we brought them to lycee  a school in Ales that served a - as a hospital  and I think he couldnt make it though  because he had been really badly shot right in the chest.
In Dayton the only tem -- the only synagogue which had Sunday schools  had a Sunday school and a full time English speaking rabbi -- was a Reform Temple  which at that time was ultra-Reform.
He was a professor at the high commercial school  a university in Berlin.
Every year when the school fi nish  we went to villages.
They said how  and I said we just put something in his mouth and see and I spoke with that Sishko  that from brewery  th e director  and I was such a close friend with her  went together with her to school.
They established school  they had a temple  they had a visiting rabbi.
And I I was then sent to cadet school and that would ch check out with V-E day in May  its a three months course  all right?
You know I studied French in school and I like languages and I wanted to do that.
As a matter of fact  my wife remembers it because we were school friends and she remembers.
I really learned a lot on the jobs and I went -- got better and better jobs in the office  and yes -- and I -- I -- I did very well  I got to be administration director and hired and fired people  and that was good  I just wished that Id gone back to school  but I had a child and I had to babysit him  sort of th ing and my husband just didnt want to do that for me so I missed out -- out on that a little bit.
I started he was already in medi cal school; hed just started.
Well  school kids  friends of mine  when we walked home from school  or when we walked to school  very often there were mobs of Hitler youth and they just beat us up  and nobody came to our rescue.
93 Was it a -- a full town  or just -- No  it was a village  and it was the big farm which belong to -- to the Polish prince over there  the noble [indecipherable] it was -- it -- the big farm  and nearby was a little village which was -- name was Kostovitz  I dont know how -- and nu ns used to run school and orphanage in Kostovitz.
But in 37  things became too uncomfortable  and I went to the Jewish school.
And I had lots of friends Wartime friends  En glish friends  English friends from cadet school.
I am 2 going a little too -- then I start to study in grad school  dentistry.
Now  I was all -- by then I was already 17 and I was in a class with the 13 year olds  who were first entering high school  you see?
No  I do no  I did  before we moved  I did have kindergarte n in a local school there.
He was away; he went to school  and he had to make a living.
Was no problem in the high school for the Jewish people  for the Jewish children.
Its in -- interesting that I suppose there was still an assumption  at least in my school  from the top down I assume  that we were refusing to be annexed by Hitler.
And the whole school  money was donated by Jewish families .
It is amazing to me that as a child during those times before this action and this devastating action that took place  my main con cern and regret was I couldnt go to school.
Well  when I went...after I graduated from the University of Wisconsin  I went to London and to the London School of Economics and to spend most of '34 and '35 over there.
So my concern -- my ma -- mothers concern wasnt getting me off -- off to school -- and you have to remember  by this time I was speaking English already  and it was not a long distance away  but again my mother spoke that th e Quakers in Bedford  it was not a Jewish -- End of Tape One  Side B 29 Beginning Tape Two  Side A Okay  this is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with John Meyerstein  conducted by Nina Ellis on July first  2004  in Washington  D.C.. This is tape number two  side A. So were in -- its 1940 now.
So you didnt understand a nything  because we went to Romanian school as children  you know.
And most of the Jewish populations in these small cities  either had a chayder  which was a religious school  wher e things were taught in Hebrew and in Yiddish.
The thing of it was  having gone to school in England  I was ahead here.
I figure yeah  well  what happen  that woman had the husband that he showed he went all over to the school  and he show ed for the children  things in school  all kind of things he show.
Went to Switzerland '47  1947  for three months and just went to school up to third grade in 1949.
And then there was the Jewish center in Detroit  that was the center point of going to school ov er there and meeting people.
Peter and I got along quite well  we we played together  we met after school  etcetera.
And I would be going to work  you know  and just keep him in school.
This didnt happen until the latter part of 1937  so I am talking about friends from when I was a little girl  from prior to going to school until the latter part of 1937.
So  in meantime  we met other friends of ours from high school yet.
The outbreak of the wa r was excitement and sort of loss of interest for school subjects.
And they were Quakers; and because they ran a school  they took in other children who were not Jewish and so for them to have other children there was not as obvious as it would have been for you know for an ordinary family.
She had taken up another Masters since  and shes right now studying for her Ph.D. Sh e -- she was teaching at the time in -- in a school over there  which it was dignitaries children  some from ambassadors  and so on.
They would help out with things a school would need  they we re especially instrumental in providing vitamins  winter clothes and help with sending children to camp s like the one we had been in  in 1940.
And I think there were about -- in total about two or three other Jewish boys at the school.
And it must have some part of a -- of a bullet that had hit a rock and splintered  and part of the thing ricocheted  but it didnt go inside  I didnt find anything  it wasnt a major wound  and it didnt hurt  but nev-nevertheless when I was taken to [indecipherable] I was bandaged by a woman who turned out to be a Jewish woman  who had gone to school for midwives  with a -- a -- a young girl  who was next door neighbors to us.
>> Dora Klayman: All the Jewish  all the questions of how -- what was banned to the Jews  anything that involved any access to public life; that included whether you sit on a bench in the park  whether you participate in an orchestra  whether you go to school  whether you -- >> Bill Benson: Work?
Now Earl Harrison I understand at this time was the Dean of the Law School in Philadelphia.
So you went to this public school and you were in the Protestant wing or section.
He 10 was like  you know  they couldnt pay him muc h  and she opened the Tarbut school  and we were learning the modern Hebrew.
And the young woman  high school kid  waitress  listens to us and says  \  What a wonderful Yankee accent you have.\  [
You graduated medical school  now be an intern in the hospital for a year  and then we will take you into the Army and we'll commission you as a medical officer.
By this time Im out of school  but I felt so bad  cause I had lied to her  you know  to get this little pass that I had.
Uh...I grew up in this mill district of Pittsburgh to the age of 7  then moved to the ghetto of Squirrel Hill because I had to go to Hebrew and all the synagogues and Hebrew schools were in Squirrel Hill  and I completed my high school educa tion at High School  40 percent Jewish and...uh...finished in 1936  by which time I had already decided to be a Rabbi.
First I had to walk the three kilometers to the train station and then take the train to Stuttgart  which was another hour  and then walk by myself to the school.
Albert was placed in a Catholic boarding school for boys  and his sisters in one for girls  in a northeastern suburb of Paris.
He asked my mother then  he said he'd like to enrol me in a school  he knows of a g ood school and she said well I can' t  she has to help me feed the kids.
No  I would intend to go to school because I registered for the next year's semester.
