To the end when I gave that woman that slice of bread.
I am very liberal.ﬂ But that gave me food for thought .
It was very much the center of the war and food was hard to come by.
We could see that a number of shops where we had been shopping regularly for either food or clothes or that sort of thing  were closed.
But then in a little  they gave us something to eat.
I was in the woods  in the middle of France with no food and no nothing.
>> Bill Benson: Do I remember correctly that in order to even get on the ship you had one grandparent who did not want to go because they weren't serving kosher food.
I got permission to go out of the Ghetto and I went out of course I bring back the food so there was also other people they brought in the food and it started to get a little bit better.
I guess they provided food in part for the whole institution.
But every day father -- at midnight  father would come and bring some food.
And we had potato and water  like a soup  at night.
I went in and somehow I got hanged up with  uh  with people that worked outside and I was working with a...and everyday I found out how to organize food.
If you miss a day of work  you get less food; because the  the  the place of work provided one soup a day.
And as we came close to Sobib or   the whole day  natural without food  without water  but that really didn't bother  we were used to it.
They give me food and they try everything to wake up.
I noticed that you had all sorts of authorization forms  travel  laisser-passer   you had had drivers license  you had all sorts of identity cards  and Also had all kind of food cards.
And so the people that had this kind of experience  their chances of survival was a little bit less than the ones that  that I had a dream for example  and I dream about my grandchildren  I will sit at the table and I will eat the same food I ate in concentration camp or in ghetto  which is uh potato peels  that they used to give you in ghetto if you had swollen feet  this supposed  this was your medicine  there was not a medicine  you know.
The assumption of -- that there is enough food and theres good water and there is good this and that and that is the wrong assumption.
Though we always had things  and food and at one point we had these neighbors who lived -- I guess that is when we lived in .
So they also had a ration system that they allowed the Jews to like 300 calories a day food.
He was the head butcher in charge of -- he never touched the meat but he was in charge of all the food.
17 Could you describe to us what type of food you had during the journey to Istanbul?
Yeah  but I -- I cant see throwing away food  no.
And we stayed hidden under the under the the the wheat  you know  the And did she bring you food  or did you Interview with Feiga Hollenberg Connors 35 October 8  2010 She brought us food every night and it was potato an d water.
I was talking with the lady of the house while my mother put it in the pots the food; because they was very proud to accept it.
What do you take what you have  especially since  you know  after this September month  lot of our food  what we had prepared was gone.
They didnt speak French  they had no money  they had no food.
At noon...at...in the forenoon  in the morning  which was the basis of all our food.
Mostly 14  15  13 year olds  but my sister was already  I was nine-twenty-two  and I was already 19 then  but I looked very thin and skinny  and I didn't look my age because I had been already starving for years before because uh from  I was in mostly in hiding  we didn't have papers so uh  and I didn't have uh al ready food uh the proper food for a few years  so  she knew that I am  that I write poetry  and she told me that her block elders like talented children  she will tell her about me  so I told her  \ All right.\
Even food  you know  you get used to the certain things which you didnt have in Europe.
The food was good.ﬂ It was... and mine  his wife of my god father  she was a teacher.
We were no longer allowed  uh  to go to parks to go to movies  have businesses  and to uh  go to school  uh  no kind of education  um  we uh  uh could not buy uh  uh food or  or anything in stores  we had to wait till the last one was served before if ever we did get it that we could ask for something.
My brother was working for the  well the clothing distribution and food distribution.
Moise Weiner: Cattle car or for foods; not food  but car for products  produce --- freight.
You think  I do this  I will think about food  I will think about when they will -- no  only when we arrive -- when we arrive back afterward  we think if we have a blanket to cover ourselves.
No  but she had the she had very funny ways  how she got little bit of mo food in.
And carrying food and warm clothing in these buckets to take back to these people  so that they could take it back to their families.
We were supposed to eat all the food that was presented to us  and they had blood sausage and polenta  and those two things I hated with a passion and I wouldn't eat them  and I got demerits.
So I went to the village  I used to work and at night I used to bring him potatoes and he will feed -- give to some food to some other people.
We didnt have any insignias  no sn -- no -- no anything like that  but we wore the -- they gave us the uniforms we were wear ing and handing out the food.
Because this way he got food and everything  it was easy.
But when my mo -- my oldest brot her  Haim  when he was more or less in USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0061 6his 20s  early 20s  and he slowly took over business by our pare nts  and he always looked at a food store  little grocery store  we could make a living  he made a living  but he couldnt make money all the -- actually for a better life.
There were no weddings though there was one place two stories you know like a  over there was a cafeteria you know just like a couple ballrooms whatever we made it into and  we decide to get married in that building and people start calling from all over was like 300 or more people and people brought apples and food and like I mentioned before there was a bunch of guys brought instruments and they were playing and didn't harmonize too good but they were playing for me a tunes and everybody had a good time.
What I'm going to do  without food  without clothes  where to go?
But anyway  we were hungry at times  but not as bad as some.
We got a lot of lice and...uh...the food was not good  but later on this was good food.
He was in between places  and we both were we both had s-sores on our skin  which had to do with the richness of the food that we used to get at home.
A salami  and some other food  I dont recall exactly  but I remember the sa lami because she slice it up  you know?
Before to do this job  some people...one guy or two guys  they go and to watch what people  German people  goes from there to bring water or do they goes to make food  some things  and they're on a side what we can come and to catch them.
So  he had to report this  and he had a certain portion  actually the majority of what he produced had to give to the Germans because they need food for them.
She gave me a ration -- marks to -- I got some food from this girl who had sent me this parcel for the -- for the French prisoners.
One night a gentleman came to our house and asked if he could sleep over  that he wouldn't need any food.
We are not getting any more food  its already three or four days  were not getting no food  we didnt go to work no place.
And here I have to tell you a very interesting moment at night he was afraid th at the -- that the hunger will -- will force me to go out and take some food that I cannot digest.
During the war he occasionally came and brought food because food was very  ve ry rare in Vienna.
Because in the train we again didnt have air  didnt have food.
So I told him  we had to work to eat and if Rum-cof-ski would have been not able to negotiate with the Germans  to give us materials  raw material s  and we would manufacture and would deliver the completed goods to them in exchange for money and food.
I was in the food service  and as a matter of fact  my job there was rather good.
I know that  yeah  there must have been a soup kitchen because I remember that we used to go to get some food  because we didn 't have the food at home.
How tasty was the food what I hated and didnt eat.
>> Bill Benson: Fanny  when you were liberated by the Russians and you were able to get a little bit of food  where did you go then?
I mean  ya -- you know  we couldnt -- we werent allowed to walk -- not that people came out of [indecipherable] they were too frightened to come out  but you know youve got to eat  youve got to buy food.
When we went for food  when we want...they made man hunts  and one time we lost lost 29 people.
But then in a little  they gave us something to eat.
And we said  well  what did you have to what ar e you eating?
And therefore  the diversion of goods  of manufactured goods  and food from the regular market was considered a very great threat to the economy.
But uh it was like a black market afterwards  you know.
So I with my brother  we decided with one brother  with Hersh  we decided to travel to take food to Krakow and to bring back things what the...what the farmers need...uh  the public he re needs.
We -- at least we got something  a piece of bread in the morning and in the evening and lunchtime we had the soup.
Who is going to the back  but you know somebody nice told the girls that somebody knows that somebody is going to pick up the food at night.
Well  let me just ask you  those first couple of days in Buchenwald   before you got sick  do you -- do you re -- recall being there when the Americans come in and they start giving you food?
The only exception was got the same food  got the same everything  except non-Jewish prisoners were never taken to Selektion.
On the street s I had a non-Jewish appearance and I when I took the star off I was like everybody else which I did on occasion to go out and buy food and stuff like that.
And we saw food laying there and clothes everywhere around the place.
The corpsmen handed out as much food as they could wrangle together  but these people couldnt eat too much.
And so I went out with Mrs. Loissen  to deliver food to the sisters  and you can tell I wasnt over-nourished.
We still didn't know where we would go  but everybody was advised to take food.
So what they did was  is they would take away their rifles  take away their clothing.
He didn't go on the black market like some other people made money but at least we had food.
We had to go eat ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 17 outside.
I wanted well I wanted to be a baker because I always had food.
They were in charge  you know  of - they were responsible for the kitchen and for the supplies and  you know  in general - the Germans would dump the food and dump it  and th ey were in charge of all those  I mean  they were running a camp where was a thousand or over people.
Twenty-one days was was no food [indecipherable] So it was one pail of water for a hundred people on the on the wagon  or however many there were.
They stabilized us  we did get a little milk mixed with water and a gruel  kind of like a baby food  for some time.
The young men will be given food  they will be laborers.
We have no way to go get other food from the other side from the people that were coming from their homes and the factory.
And Stalin send him armorment and food and so on because the agreement was signed on the 23rd of August 1939.
Uh  people stood in line for hours to get a piece of bread  you know  that was hard bread or  or  or so soft that it was almost raw.
It was something awful  and after the death march  even though we had wa rmer clothes and ev erything  we wouldnt have lasted more than two weeks in Ravensbruck  between the beating and no food whatsoever and the tortures that were inf licted on us by the camp inmates  by the capos  by the Aufseherinnen  the SS women in uniform it was just unbelievable.
There was a lot of discussion  among my parents particularly  as to where to go  and my father  who was very much of an optimist  unfortunately did not size up the situation very well  and thought it would pass in some way  thought that we would be comfortable at the at the home of this governess  because her parents were there  and because there would be food there and sh and so on  and my mother  who was arguing that this was stupi d  that as that we shouldnt stop anywhere and we should just go straight to the border with Romania   that was what many people did  and better than we did.
You just take uh the...your  your coat  and you...you take just the bread  the food that you have.
We got food rations and I remember that the entire experience was very depressing and very devastating.
The guards had left already and they took all the food.
We -- at least we got something  a piece of bread in the morning and in the evening and lunchtime we had the soup.
What would happen  we would get to the station  and people  some people from each car would run to the center of the town to see if they could buy  steal or whatever some food.
We had all of this food stuff coming in  which brings up the story you learned before.
They told us to eat  warm food  and they talked very rapidly in Italian.
Thats all we could think of was in our em our stomachs were empty  was it was we were very hungry.
And and they would provide some food  and of course vitamins.
But they felt in this smaller village  they can have a little more food to eat and they will get a little stronger  then they will go to od.
Q. If you couldn't get outside  how did you get food?
And when they gassed them in the tanks  all the food remain ed  so they could take it home with them.
Of course  there was not enough to be food  but better than in Koronovo.
And he helped me quite a lot with the food and protect me from the atrocities which were occurring in Auschwitz.
And then  to make matters worse -- eventually we got food there  the French brought you know - 46 Im going to -- Im going to ha -- Im going to have to stop you  Im sorry  we have to change the tape.
With the money we collected for the coal we could buy some food.
They give us food  bread  right away and they took us to Sokolov?
So we slept in G.I. racks and ate G.I. food  but who cared?
And they were begging in all kinds of foreign languages  apparently  for food and water.
Well  the month you when you brought him food and drink Listen  I know it was hot  because I needed to bring some drinks to my father  so probably was no school.
And so there was  we knew of quite a circle of underground Jews and so that was also a source for black market food.
The only thing that was there to eat really was ground up tulip bulbs which Holland had many of.
If he didnt brought something  a lot of food  a little  a little  to keep fo r one day  two days.
I got I remember I wasn t allowed to eat solid food and so on.
I was walking around looking to be captured  to be taken to work  because that was the only opportunity  by being at work outside the Kovno ghetto  that I may have somehow a possibility to have some kind of food to survive and to bring to my family.
So as I said  you had to supplement your food through outside bartering.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 24 When I was with my mother  sometimes in public  not very often  we didn't talk.
That was some va -- why someone send clot hes  some food  not much  but just that was give the different for starving to deat h and just starve.
64 I really didnt have anything -- I didnt want to buy anything  it was -- you know  food sometimes you -- Food. --
So we didn't eat the food them alre ady from the....what they gave us.
They were -- certainly knew that something that -- things are going to get real dicey  and there was no food  no water.
There's no problem  I promised your father I will take care of you.ﬂ I was very happy--they gave me food to eat  they put me to sleep.
Probably some food or something  bu t n-nothing that I remem -- no clothing  nothing.
When a package arrived  and I immediately knew when it was brought in by the first sergeant that this was not food from some f-friend or relative.
But -- but we ate there  I think they had so much food  and then we kind of got  would you say chummy  or -- the camp director  he had the little girl about my age  so I was friendly with her  and -- Im moving things.
Wentworth Films LIBERATION/DP PROJ 2/14/95 Int GEORGE SALTON Page 17 kitchen  and some places later  for families it was possible to rather than that get in line to get you food in the kitchen  to get some supplies to people who had the need to and the ability cook could cook their own food.
Uh certainly you had to ha ve the the will to survive and I mu st say after the first couple of weeks or months  where very often I was confronted with the question  will I be able to make it  or should I rather uh uh uh put an end to my life in order to be liberated from the misery  but then after one year or so when I got the bette r job and could work as a welder  and also was able to uh to uh get some additional food here a nd there for certain activities  fo r instance  when I was was uh appointed a bed-maker and and also when I was appo inted to be the secretary of the block in order to keep the records  that gave me a chance uh then to to uh somehow keep myself cleaner and and uh also to...my my I would say was was strength ened by by by that... How did you...can you tell me about becoming...how di d it happen that you became the secretary of the block?
When the Russians came in my mother started talking Russian to them.
I was wearing my high-top shoes  even though it was in the summer  and I took that winter coat and a sweater  and I don't recall  no toys  none whatsoever  and I don't know what my -- my sister tried to grab her violin  but my mother told her to leave it  and she took some food  we had dried noodles and some food that could be -- that wasn't perishable.
80 Jewish council (German); term used for Jewish administrative boards appointed by the Nazis to oversee Jewish communities and ghettos.
Who -- who gave you food or clothes [indecipherable] Many  many Jews were in DP camps  so Joint supported.
We were given a slice of bread a day and some brown liquid to drink  and in the evening there was supposed to be a soup but we were given no utensils.
It was -- it was an incredible s-situation because you didnt have food.
So right away  they have food and the bunker is made.
So we took USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0032 13 that -- took it under advice and we contained ourselves to dairy products and -- and it worked  because -- well  it didnt work with me  but it worked  because I later on found out that I had -- have a peptic ulcer and when I came to the United States  I found it out and  you know  and -- but  by and large  a lot of people died after the war  from being fed by the English army  more food and fat food th an they should have had.
And then we had our cows  so we had our cows for milk.
But I had a terrible stomach  you know the food was terrible and the cold.
So he  we had a little bit of more food than usual but still there was hardly any food in the house and so there was a whole lot of tension about food in the house because you cook for twelve people and and uh divide it up.
Now  we knew we were hungry  we were starved because we hadn't gotten any food from the time we left Gross Rosen in the cattle cars.
There was very little food  almost no food  and no water.
Once in a while you got a little soup and that was it.
And a big thing was ba -- bringing food stuff to the west  to the German border  and exchangi ng it for other things like linen and so on  and then coming to Poland and se-selling linen fo r money and living on that.
>> Bill Benson: How did your parents manage to provide the essentials like food?
Oh well  you know  I'm sure that you're familiar with the final solution  the book  the Germans final solution of the Jews  and the goal was  as long as they can  you're a little productive  whatever you can do when they need you  with very little investment as far food is concerned or anything else  till you  till you literally couldn't do it anymore  when you couldn't  you couldn't uh your strength is going  you automatically  they took you and you know you were disposed of.
Uh one day somebody visited us from the underground-because people had applied with the underground through  through...I don't know but through people  because they needed tickets to get food  extra food from the underground-so a man came and said  \ So \  he said  \ Nice to see you.
We were very wild  food w as the main object in our life at that time.
So my brother used to be the one who would steal his way out and if my uncle would find 18 something that he should give him to trade for food  he would go.
And we were there  with food  with freedom  we could go where we wanted to go.
My grandmother had a route  if you want to say  or route where she went and distributed food on a certain day every month.
So my mother was given notice that she should present herself at the police station two days from today and with enough food for three days and two blankets and she would be evacuated; which basically meant deported  but we didn't understand that.
She used to have to go down to bring up some food or get in that shelter some food or  or food stamps or whatever we  like little nut foods  there was a little ticket to go to get the food.
How did  did you want to go there or that was... No  again  I didn't have money  I was hungry and over there a bed was waiting for me  a room  food  exactly in time  good food  candies and even cigarettes.
And you -- they would get their food and y ou would look down -- lo ok down the row and you would see the mouse  like that.
But they were not taking people who were in the kibbutz because they needed the food that was  there was no other way just to import and so on.
Everybody liked to have a pair of boots  and that gave him enough from the farmers who from making boots  that will would bring him all kinds of food in the house so it was no shortage.
And he showed me he said to me  what are you doing with the food?
When we came we were hot we were hungry  they gave us a loaf of bread.
You know  you spoke earlier in -- in -- in telling a story  y -- but you mentioned the can that you carri ed  that I think all -- all of you would have on you  so that if there were any food -- Oh  yeah.
And we were starved  but we ignored it and we were looking for the chamber where they would keep all the food.
And I remember that they kind of helped us a little bit with some food.
They were searching for illegal weapons  food  illegal food  meat  stuff like this.
And UNRRA 38 supported food  and we got little  little rations.
Some food in the ghetto was not enough  but it was not .
Sometimes they overlooked not ev not all the times  they were very harsh on bringing in food.
In other words  they collected money and then would take care of people who had no shelter  or food.
They were buying...uh...the products like...like...uh  eggs  and grain and...and everything from the...and...and they came and insist and my father was buying the ...he took...he took the working people what they picked the food and this we..we exported to Cartovich.
And  and  we were always cooking -- for some reason ﬁsome day we will have food again.ﬂ When you're hungry  that's the only thing you think of.
They would see us day afte r day and they would know that we had something to give them and they brought us some bread or something edible.
That somebody makes a bad comment  its a free country  free speech  and to me  thats a greater thing here  living in this democracy  that its not youll have good food to eat  or be [i ndecipherable] one time  and that I -- this -- this [indecipherable] that as far as food is co ncerned  and many other thing  but the bigger USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 41 thing with me is free speech; that I can say anything I want.
I wouldnt I couldnt believe that somebody has bread and food and meat in this store.
He couldnt and I got after him and smuggled out food.
We probably got food from the peop le from the Jewish people who lived before the war in Lwow.
Is that -- You know ac -- you know  ya -- this you get sa -- no  it wasnt a question that I a -- I had to work because if I didnt work then there was no ration card  there was no food.
And then what did you -- what -- what -- did they give you any food?
If they had some food  they had to hide it because somebody will take it.
DL] And did you use the Red Cross parcels to then barter for additional food in the factory? [
And the people that they caught to give blood  they said they were never the same again because they didnt have food to make up for the loss of blood.
Was tough for them even to  to get food over there.
If you were ahead of the group leaving  you were the first one to get to a marketplace where animals were sold in the day time or the marketplace where the food was sold  so these were op en areas with the junk and with the animal droppings where you could pick a spot where you can sleep.
Our family in that particular section  and then the Germans came in  and after being 2  3 weeks with our parents trying to survive without food  we couldn't go and buy anything because nobody would sold us.
We -- it must have been at that time too  the Germans were bivouacked in a park  and they have all kinds of food and we would go and talk German -- I -- I know we -- we 34 stayed up nights thinking of stories to tell them.
I mean just talk about unbelievable happiness  and th at's just a side story because when we were brought into that house with all that food  I remember what I said to myself.
I didnt have too much because I couldnt eat  you know.
I showed her where the grocery was where I used to go.
They were liquidating all the ... tobacco  food  hams  meats  that the Polish peasants were smuggling to the city to sell in the black market.
And I saw him several times  he came to visit because some of the men could come into the camp with some errands and they would bring food or they woul d bring something and he woul d sneak out and say hello or  sometimes  he could even come to the fence.
And they were holding us days and days  and transferring us from place to place without food.
Just to know that there's enough= food on the table the next day for the kids after my father died and she was a seamstress  and she did the best and we went to school and we had our we had our food and we had clothing and we had schooling and we went to movies and we had good times and bad times  but I could never really go into a detail then and ask my mother  How do you feel about this now?
And he became a big wheel in th e Dutch  so-called black market  he did  you could do everything after the war  cause that's how people survived  that's how people got food and coupons and that was an accepted thing  because he didn't steal from anybody  he was just tr ading.
They gave us food  they washed us  and they put us on the h-hay  there was hay on the floor.
She went like if she would be Jewish; and went to my grandfather and brought him food and brought him some things.
The story about how you used the food in order to protect yourself.
These farmers would actually leave my father because my father helped them out in the past  would drop off certain food for us.
And one of the doctors tried to s-say di dont give him so much food  you know.
We also had soup kitchens that we set up in order to help the people that didn't have a place to cook or couldn't help themselves.
No  I -- I cant say that they were -- there were two girls who did the cooking with -- and we had -- s-so we -- we had to go to work and the food was -- oh  once -- at lunch time it was quite all right  but not in the evening  we didnt get anything.
And -- and how you survive  and where do you get food.
The food we got was between four and 600 calories a day.
Like a  a little beat-up container  you know  you got the food  you know  you call it ﬁpishke.ﬂ So everybody used to have one.
Not that we saw them at that -- wethum -- we got food and we got everything.
They came to Miller and they asked him that he should give them  should go a nd give them ration of food.
Because as you see in the Anne Frank story  people were eating their fami ly members food.. At once I had nothing  and I turned around I walked back and the rabbi died from hunger.
They had walked from I dont know where  but -- and on the way they found dead horses and they found whatever the -- food they could find and they brought it to camp with them.
And on the day if some visit was...uh...really programmed in the hospital  then they have prepared better food  for the eyes you see.
But she -- she had lost saliva  so she couldnt chew her food  and it was very painful.
I was in charge of food for...there was probably six to eight hundred people there and I would keep...our group was in charge of the .
After the war I went to the farmer and he told me that she was there and sold the boots and got food.
So somehow we had to gather whatever we could--our--with our own wits to try to get something to eat or else you starved to death.
My father was in the labor battalion before he was taken to Yugoslavia but he was inside Hungary so we could visit him  we could take food for hi m and eventually  when a new prime minister came  he declared that anybody over lets say  fo rty-five can go home.
We all enjoyed being ther e. >> Bill Benson: You remember it being postwar France  conditions remained very difficult for folks for several years after the war  in terms of scarcity  food products  clothing.
RJ] Because if you didnt then you would be lying on your bed dreaming about home we used to talk and if we were chatting then it was always about what food youd have when you get home  what restaurants youd go to when you got home all those kinds of things so it was better that you had something to do [DL] And did people chat about what was happening to the Jews? [
We had nothing to eat  we had no food  we had no money.
The ghetto  as I mentioned  was in a very poor section of town  the Jewish quarters.
Mostly  they were put there without any food and then only the bodies were pulled out from there and burned.
The food we got in the morning  you had to get up about 4:00 in the morning and we stayed outside.
We went to the basement  the basement was very well prepared with food Interview with Blan ka Rothschild March 16  2001 4and sleeping equipment.
There were some that cared  again  for food  but didnt care for our welfare.
Then it was a house in Germany  a Jewish family  the aroma even of the food you can smell and the singing of the classical music.
She took a...we had a...a pot and she went and she took out food and she ran away.
So she knows always when Im coming and I got my place there and I walked eat there  and she knows  Interview with Jack Mondschein February 15  2013 129oh Janek is coming  she make me special food  not like here.
So they managed to go north to Bialyst ok or to we heard stories that the people were filth  dirty  they have no food  they have excuse me.
I dont want to live on a crowded street all the time  but sometimes  and I want to go to a sidewalk cafe  and I want to eat some different food that doesnt taste the same  a nd just converse with people.
When you see what ha ppens in Russian where they have no food  and they stay in line for hours  and get no food.
Well  on the way  we picked up Polish non -- non-Jewish slave laborers  who might have complained  probably that the food wasnt good  or that they were working too hard  or whatever and instead of a slave labor camp  they were now sent to Auschwitz.
But usually there were groups of five  six  and whatever extra food we could get  one was helping the other.
I remember them turning against the ones that went for the food  and I think this is probably why it left such a lasting impression on me is that if if a man is hungry and reaches for something  he gets beaten and and in some cases shot.
I didn't know there was such a thing as light milk  didn't exis t. We didn't have any idea what good food was.
I thought we were lucky to have jobs  we had enough food.
So we butchered horses and we fed them meat  potatoes and vegetables.
She she didnt she didnt have anything to to give me  or to to ca the food was bad  the medical attention was normal for that particular area  but we were already rather weak.
Well  it was t -- it was tough without arms  we couldnt -- without arms you cant -- cant even get food  you know.
Well  we didnt notice much  there was an distribution -- distribution of food and cigarettes and everything  but everything went well.
>> Bill Benson: And as you said  your mom then made the decision to put you into hiding.
I mean  how long do you -- was it after you heard you were free that everybody started to run into the town and look for food?
But these people were starving  so we gave them biscuits and whatever canned goods we had  we had to open it for them.
Everybody ate all that food and then my mother was still delirious and I  somebody said to me  this is the crisis if she gets through it.
And they took us to the organization  to the Joint  and they told us that we can go to Israel  or we can go to Germany  you know  and they help us  they give us food  they give us some money  you know  and they they put us on a pla in a plane  in Czechoslovakia .
So we could eat the food that was left over...she would put it in a big basin so we could eat it on our hands and knees like dogs to amuse the children.
And he fill down  the horse  I fill down for him the horse and buggy with the food  and they took away.
We were treated well  we were given clean rooms  with clean beds  with clothes to wear  with food to eat.
I helped her with food  and I sent quite often hilf22 -- help -- to her house.
So I got this money and I saved -- they didn t want money from me.
Well  Bertl and Edith used to send packages to Aunt Hannah and to Norwich  I don't know who else to  because it was still very hard to get food in England.
While they were in the citadel with some packages  with whatever food and clothing or whatever was needed into the citadel and Rochelle w ho's the only one who survived told me that a German gave her milk through the bars every si ngle day.
For me it was not difficult because at the beginning I was in the washing room  so I had a double amount of the regular food that they were gi ving to the others.
He was a landowner and he sold some of his land and he started wheeling and dealing and he already was making business and there wasn't any lack of food or anything in the house in 1944.
We didnt have - we had bread and soup  but maybe we were allowed to eat as much as we could.
There were very few German Jews remaining in -- just a very few that I ran across  who would come to us for food  identity papers certifying that they were stateless  or that they had been persecutees  and therefore  entitled to certain privileges as to immigration  food  medical care  clothing  whatever.
We didn't care what it was  as long as they weren't hungry.
I remember the suitcase was a green suitcase  it was a canvas  but it was full of canned food.
They took us  you know  around  so we can get some food to eat  and we kept walking.
That was  that was the bringing food to Germany or vegetable or --------or whatever it was.
One thing I remember is because we didn't have much food  there wasn't much meat in those days and I can re member my father raising rabbits in one room in that hous e where we lived and we were overrun with rabbits.
And you have to go in snow so high  right  no food.
Did you get to know many Jewish families  how did that work?
We didnt starve  not like in Auschwitz  but we certainly get enough food  but in comparison with Auschwitz  the slave labor camp  was much  much better and you kind of have to accept whatever the situation was like.
And -- and this family took him  because he had money  apparently.
They used to say take it  I have enough  I ca I cant eat any more  because he he likes you  he wants to give you his food  you know  h-half of it.
But they were going under with the food container and robbed the food container.
As long as food the ships came in  it worked very well  but then the Germans stopped it.
This is what it is you cant go to school  you cant play  you cant you dont have much food  you cant go outside on certain da ys.
They helped him in Fuft  they called his family  they gave him money for the train  and it wasn't  this was not toward the very end of the war  and his wife  my aunt  was allowed to send him a package once a month  of maybe 3 lbs of food and uh  she woul d come to our house to make a package  it was so painful for her to do that  and uh  I have asked his three daughters to record what he did and what uh  what they actually found uh  what they found  they came to my grandmother's and they were uh  she was under arrest  she was then in her 80s and they said  um  she said  \ Why have you arrested my son?
He said  \ Yes  but it's because it's neutral that we are able through the the German...the Jewish...the...uh...Swedish-Jewish community to send parcels of food into the Germans...the camps in Germany for our people.
I went out from that thing when I recovered.ﬂ There wa s no food.
We had a lot of food that we -- my father was able to buy because  in our store -- since money was USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0038 37 losing value  lots of things were bought and sold on basis of barter -- barter.
We just hung around freezing and waiting for food to be given and trying to escape.
It wasnt bad  I mean we had to -- we had -- in the camps they supplied us with already -- we had plenty of food  even beer  you know.
And uh so we worked and I got my night shift  and uh  we were working twelve hours without  without food in between.
Listen  it didn't matter anyhow whatever we ate it was just to stuff our stomachs  not to go hungry.
When you say food on the table  what kind of food?
Naturally the first thing they did was put a DDT behind your clothes  but they gave us food  place to live and everything.
I got terribly sick because I was eating everything I could see. [
He said  \ Well  I'll try and get uh the chairman mayor--the Burgermeister--to give them some food  etc.\
And I remember we were walkingusually it was a walk for a few hours  but we walked two or three days.
He spent a few days and he brought food  my God.
In the first 2 days in 6 Treblinka  we still hoped that maybe we will be able to escape and we saved some food  scraped up some underwear and a coat for this eventuality.
I mean  how did the poor people -- people who were not working  how did they get food?
And there were sausages and hams and a side of pork  I mean  there was food that we haven't seen for ag es and it was just hanging from ra fters and I think that's they way 101 usually food was preserved.
So  anyway -- so then I-I-I took that back and -- and my room that I had in that house was like a veritable sort of food storage place.
So food became a problem  and talking about smuggling was again an issue.
The German people would bring out their wares  maybe their clothes or their watches or whatever  to sell  to exchange for food.
They were brought food or they could cook some themselves .
I th -- no  we just came ho me  washed  went for food  went back.
He was in Theresienstadt and he saw Anna scrounging around for some food and they got a little bit.
Somebody came duri ng the night or early in the morning and they were robbed  and all of that found its way on the black market  so as far as where we were in Belgium  we had food.
I dont really remember  food was never very important to me  but I think oh  no  no  we didnt  but there were always the civilian Germans who would sneak food for us.
There werent any more food being sent in from abroad  so Who was entitled to the the food they brought?
Most likely  I'm kosher; they did not serve any kosher food.
They would give us bread  and sometimes they would even bring some like hot soup or so to feed us.
And he got food poisoning a nd I really didnt want to go in the first place.
We didn't mind them  as long as they didn't take our food.
We used to - we didn't have any horses or anything  we used to have a little buggy  long buggy  one on the side and I on other side and we would pull from place to place and distribute food.
And he was telling me these stories about how he would get paid at the end of the week and -- and he would get an -- a paper bag full of money and he would run to the store and buy whatever he could buy  you know  in food and things  because if you waited at all  for a minute  that whole bag might buy you one little wurst  you know.
Because you had to really get used to food again; we had no food whatsoever.
They gave us enough food...and they gave us for awhile enough food in ghetto in order to calm our nerves we should start believing them.
And I...I said  \ I will not eat this terrible food here.
And my mother was kosher the home was kosher  however  my father outside was eating not kosher.
But she would have it the weakness  sort of  and told the woman that she also has a baby  and she would try and get her some food for the baby.
But I -- I re -- dont have any recollection of not having food at that time.
They would see  the Germans would see that he was giving away food  they would kill him on the spot.
In the morning  we had black coffee with a little piece of bread.
I stand with my plate for food and all of a sudden I get the chill.
I was there illegally  so I was not 6 listed so they would get food for three people for a week and they would share that with me.
I mean  it was rough in the beginning an d -- but eventually  you know  we had USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0080 87enough food and listen  you cant compare that.
They they they went from hand to mouth as far as food is concerned.
And all the American soldiers in first line was all time food for one day survive  if you are in situation; chocolate  sugar  or some other f ood.
For instance  you could you could buy at th e marketplace dried fruit  like you could Interview with Maurice Friedberg August 12  2009 51exchange it for other dried food.
Didn't bother taking aw ay from him  but since we were so short and the farmer really didn't have enough money to buy even for the cattle's food  so we felt for him.
So that was one of the gr eat things that they did for us.
Ther e were some Jews i-in the big city  Wurzburg  who had come back  whom I knew from before  and I helped them  I went there at night 67 sometimes to bring them some food or something.
Now  I had to do the laundry  because that s in -- but all the other women had to do something  and like I say  there was nothing any more in the Netherlands  so all those other women had to sit on long tables  that was also the tables where we had to eat  and on benches  and they had a rusty cup for themself  and it was water in it  and they got long strips of brown paper  and you know  when you go shopping  for food shopping  then you get those big brown bags  that type of paper.
But that make me just stronger  b ecause we had there food.
And on the sea the child -- probably Selma told the story -- the child got sick from food poisoning.
And of course  you go and you risk your life to get from the from the villagers  the food.
I mean  I can look at people in my own family  looking at certain dangers that they look at: the food might be now 3 days old  (you know) what you got a problem.
She might not be able to come tomorrow with food or something so we just kept it and looked at it all night and all day.
These people quickly organized soup kitchens to ensure that those Jews who could not afford to buy their own food will have two hot meals daily.
And the food was very poor but we actually worked in fields and the fields w here we worked there were some Interview with Hans Ziegler 20 December 21  2012 Potatoes or Some  there was some food growing on the field.
When we came in the evening back when the f ood was given out  the hard food  no  the evening in Sachsenhausen we got a piece of bread  a quarter of one bread  and uh a piece of margarine or a  a piece of sausage  and this was exchanged again.
And then when they didn't have no food...they ran out of food  so they...they killed the horses.
You know  we were angry at that point a nd we were hungry  we hadn't had food in days  four or five days we hadn't had food and they were bombing all night and there were people laying all over .
We eat  some people has not food  not enough food or not good food and these people die fast.
So  people used to make money  kids used to make money and they would take the money and buy food.
And then  some people who I know used to come in and they were swollen from hunger.
So my mother said  we have to make sure that we have some food  some water  we should run to the basement.
Ive seen a lot of  its painful to talk about it be cause I saw in families  how people were grabbing the portio n of food.
They must have given us some food because we got some food from them and  sometimes the train stopped so we could go  to facilities or washing something quick because we had the baby and so -- but  we made it till Odessa and then they kept us in Odessa till our boat was ready.
But it was the people in the city that couldnt find food.
Suddenly I...on the road I pick....I was picked  I picked up a couple who were on a little...who were taking food to Czernowitz to see at the market and they gave me a ride and I was sitting with them  talking with them.
And there was what I call a garage  like a sack and there was a place to keep the food and there was no place to play football there.
My father couldn't kill one of them for food because they were friendly little rabbits.
With the crest of the family on the butter– And then she brings the food.
But we...but that time we already had something to eat  you know.
The city was destroyed  there was no running water  no light  no food.
And one of the young ladies that worked there went on a date or something and saw my father at night with the cans  food.
Yeah  my uncle used to bring some things  you know  food?
This German who was good to me  he gave me food and I worked with him  pulled a pistol and shot that boy in the basement.
And so uh I don't think we were able to  after finally getting to some nice food  uh to really avail ourselves of it.
Th ey had barracks made out of veneer you know for food and also that were prefabricated that you could quickly unscrew and move on.
But in this Red Cross shelter for the women  I was helping getting some food  getting provisions.
01:36: Most people who came to the house asked for food.
I did what the others did  I slept on park benches  I slept in doorways  I slept underneath bridges  and we stole the food that we needed  we didn't know where we're going  or  or what we're going to do  or where  or where the next piece of bread was going to come from.
I do remember the Russians marched us into a warehouse of some kind after this happened and there was a tremendous scramble for food.
Canned food  chocolate  chewing gum  and one great phenomenon  peanut butter.
That was something to eat  cause they forgot to give us anything to eat by then.
I don't remember playing in the ghetto  except talking about food and pretending  you know  that we were at a banquet  and who is going to have the first  you know  piece of the meal  the first part.
Of course at the time we didn't know it and everything that we could eat  we ate.
And he did a degree in glass technology which is an unusual subject  but before he finished his studies in 1946 we brought his parents over to England becaus e they had  in fact  they lived in Krakoff and as the Germans marched in they marched out towards the Russian si de and eventually the Russians sent them right deep into Russia and although they had an awful war  there were no worse off than of the Russians because nobody had any food  so th ey were discriminated against where they were and they came back to Krakoff right after th e war  and then we brought them over to England and they always said they had been the happiest years of their lives.
They cooked the soup  but -- whatever they did  and they brought it and we were supposed to dish it out.
Some of them were Jewish  some of them were not Jewish.
We all had a bag at home with clothes and I think some food but uh we  I really didn't know exactly what was going on and I still wonder till today if anybody really knew what was waiting.
First of all  eh the next day we were given too much food to eat.
I also know that she sent packages with long underwear and -- and -- and food to Dachau  they were told they could send it.
Which at that time -- I found out late r it was bringing a lot of help  blankets and clothes and food to Berlin for the DPs  displaced persons.
And then one day somebody must have seen her do it  and they called the -- the SS  and they followed her while she was walking  bringing us food  and she started yelling to us  ﬁSave yourselves  save yourselves ﬂ and we were  you know  o -- i-in -- in the attic of the barn  and so my mother and sister  in the back  you know  everything is wooden  you know  panels  broke two wooden panels  and we jumped like two stories down and we ran and we escaped.
There was heat a nd there was  really I must say  there was heat and from what I can recollect  there was really adequate food.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 24 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: Okay.
And so  he -- he announced that on coupon A  everybody would get so much of this food and on coupon B  so much of that food.
Well  she wou she would slap me on my behind  or she would take away some privilege  or or some special kind of de ssert food.
We're not allowed to go out for one week and people bring you food to the house.
I couldnt take care of myself and whatever little food I had I couldnt eat becau se I was so full of fever all the time  I didnt know what to do with it and I had trouble washing myself and very little water.
The last 10 days...if anybody tells you that people can...cannot survive without food for whatever days  I am sure I didn't have food for ten days and I don't know how much water.
And in line for food  if somebody would go out of the line for food  he used to pull him out and say no food today and things of this nature.
I-I-I should say where -- what with black market food prices  I believe I mist akenly said in an earlier interview here  that the black market prices were 10 times regular prices.
That they required food for the journey that there were these warehouses of American military of war packages in our warehouses in Paris  packages that would no longer be needed  that were already being stolen.
We had two hours to go out and buy food for ourselves.
And nobody was allowed to touch those little bits of food until a few days had passed and then everybody could partake.
But they were still  they still led a fairly plain farm life back then  and were– I remember you didnt leave any food on your plate.
And they had nothing because they couldn't go out of the ghetto to bring in any food.
I don't have to eat food with every prisoner  when they come.
Except now we started to experience food shortage and much more limited freedom of movement.
Uh  I would then inform them what their rights were  I would check and find out what the food situation was.
So we heard  you know  that we had been starving  and they brought cases of food.
And the two hours were in the afternoon where normally there were no food in the shops anymore.
It was damp  cold  we never had enough food  and no matter how little I had  I always shared  and the girls used to tell me you'll kill yourself.
You can survive a lot longer from not eating food  but if you dont have any water try to go for water in th e sun all day long  marching  without the hat  nothing  just in your uniform.
And you have to have the food on the way back  too.
And I told you about the bad food we had  one slice of bread in the morning  one in the evening  and that was [indecipherable]  then the line leaves.
So this is how he gave us -- he provided food.
The Aryans we suppose somehow they could buy food and in the stores was more available for them; where in the Jewish neighborhoods there was nothing available.
Those that stayed there  after a while  what they told us  they got more food and they just did like every camp try employ the people by some kind of a trade or whatever  make it close to normal  and believe it or not  even in Feldafing  they developed like a trade thing with the German population.
Lets go  so theyll ma ybe give us some food [indecipherable] .
And they told me that I could pr obably get food on those items if I go to a farm on the other side of the hill  on the mountain.
They were very  you know -- kept their religion very close  and they wouldn't eat what I brought  because it wasn't kosher.
I stop at...there is a hunting lodge up there and I go to the uh keeper of the hunting lodge and I said  you know  I would like some food.
My other experience from there was I couldnt sleep  I went there  and down there  there was we have military in people who were taking care of the food under that  and th about us  and somebody who was passing by   another soldier  came and say  oh well  you have a good so many women ar ound you.
Anyhow  so I had to live with them and since they were so religious  food was awfully abominable  bec ause she was a terrible cook.
Food was very strictly rationed  and hed go around the farms lo oking for eggs for them.
The country was just  you know  came into existence and there were food shortages and again hunger.
Some of them were afraid  used to give me some food  a piece bread  some apple  whatever they had.
By that time  by the way -- by the way  the food was always a problem.
We had some friends  I think they must have been no n-Jewish  I didnt really know them  friends of my parents  who occasionally supplemented our rations with a bit of butter and a bit of meat and some eggs.
Anything what we saw  we started to eat  we were so hungry.
We would try to  you know  it doesnt matter  you know  a lot of people tried to help these people  but was -- was what you said  that was shortage with food for everybody.
So if you want to share things  make sure you ask me for more food so that you don't give yours away.
I never heard... Yes  there was an acti on at a joint meeting... I know that we received bread and food from the Joint Committee  but I never had any contact.
Whoever couldn't take it was taken to the camp  to Camp Three and was shot and a lot of people couldn't make and they fell  just fell from the from the kind of work and the food you have and things like there was a change of people.
They gave us dry milk to drink  they gave us cereal  they gave us nutritious food.
I was working there for two weeks  I had no food.
My mother was Jewish  kosher house  villages  my father  what did it get them?
They [indecipherable] access to food  to -- to alcohol  to bribe the -- the guard and all kinds of other things that -- I mean  they were privileged prisoners [indecipherable] 78 But when you -- when one says privileged  theyre still in a horrible situation.
We would like also  if it is possible  to bring us some food.
And my mother sewed some things which they still had  some gold coins in my -- in my pants  yeah  and tell me always keep that pants  dont -- dont give it away and you know  know that in the need  thats what -- how you can pay for your food.
Neighbors brought food  brought it to them  also mail f rom us when we wrote.
And there was a substantial supply of food  you know  sacks of all sorts of things.
But from that water what I drank from the river  and -- and the food [indecipherabl e]  I -- I was so sick that I couldnt get up any more.
Not for money  he got food  you know  canned food  cigarettes  sugar  gasoline  whatever.
Walking in the striped pajamas  foraging for food  perhaps killing justifiably  we thought.
We go to  I think Stalag IVB at Moosburg  I think it was  and there they got us out they gave us some food and by this time  dont forget  we are covered in lice.
We didn't care  they would shoot us all because they would find out who is eating this food  but we didn't care.
And this bleak domain  the food  supplies  and arms from the new world and the empire arrived across the oceans or they failed.
You know  but we couldn't  but we didn't eat because we didn't want to eat everything in one time.
But the stre ngth was slow in coming because there was no food for me -- Right  right. --
She used to come to the hospital to bring her goo -- you know  so me good food and things  you know  to -- to give the child  you know  the -- well  you kn ow  she a Polish woman  you see  she was doing it for her.
I says  just ask my children  I have too much food  you know.
But it had to be organized  it -- and -- you know  when a guy went out with a -- with a group  either for food  or for weapons  or to attack somebody  or to burn down a village  you know  there had to be command.
And then you had to bring it downstairs in the basement where they had the stove.
So hundreds died from eating this stuff  becau se their stomach was no used to food.
They found food for us  they gave us a place to hide.
CE: Caught you  a -- have some stolen food  th ey shot you.
And for the children they would bring a little better food.
Invite them to our mess  you know  we were eating in an army mess  and that food was different from theirs.
Were there times  restricted times to buy food  or only certain places where you could buy food?
I said  ﬁYou have to eat what is in your plate.ﬂ I always made my children eat everything on the plate.
And the stupid thing  the reason this ties in with this story  the stupid I did was  during the terrible  during those terrible days of siege  whenever I ha d some food like horsem eat or something  I would walk  they lived about a half an hour from our hou se and I would walk on the street  of course walk  try to run from one block to another  very close to the walls to deliver food to this girl and to her mother.
Because the Red Cross helped us with food  but only for the Christians--not for Jews.
People starving on the streets  coming over to the truck  begging for food  will give you anything.
So  I used to go 8 there and they used to prepare for me a package of food of something to bring home  and but you know the Polish people mo st of them it was a lot of nice people who saved a lot of people who are trying to save  and they saved a lot.
And so they send a man with a horse to bring food supplies from from ours our supplies in storage in the bank.
You had touched on in a previous interview  some thoughts about food and what it meant to you.
She was bringing food to Jews wh o were hiding and something like that  never fearing for her own life  but there wa s a curfew.
You know when  we could only take so much of all this nonsense and eventually we had to hide in cellars and a little boy occasionally brought us food.
My father and my grandmother were very religious and they wouldn't eat it.
And in that final assault  when you were moving fast and you knew that something was going on and mail wasnt catching up and you werent be ing dropped food  and I mean  did you know that you were heading into something?
So di were was everybody responsible for their own food  their own cooking at this place?
And we used to go...uh...prior to the war...uh...the Haganah used to train and we used to bring arms  ammunitions  and food to kibbutz Yeeheim .
Uh  and I remember that my mother was really horrified at the lack of cleanliness in this hotel  and that there were cats running around on the food preparation tables.
If you werent going out and trying to get food or something how did you spend your days in the ghetto while they were at work?
Not food but a cigarette  smoke it  and I took a puff and at this.... I wouldn't be there  I probably would have stayed there  but he   and he survived.
And -- And you probably heard or maybe I didnt mention to you  that when we came back  you know  after the war  after liberation  we came back home an-and remember I told you there was a Gentile man that  when I was alone and I was starved and I needed food  I -- I went to him and I told him I was hungry  so he offered me a glass of milk  a piece of black bread and a piece of pork.
So we left just  you know  what was on us  a sweater  or whatever  not much and some food.
They had to go shopping a few days a week into Havana to be able to get some kosher food and the only thing we were able to ge t near the house was like bread or butter  but otherwise if we had to need any meats or anything  we ha d to go to Havana because there was no refrigeration.
Each block has a   which counts how many people are in and how many people are out and how many coffee do we need for so many people  food for so many people and so on.
We didn't have any food and they gave us bread to eat.
If one was free of disease and if one was in a situation like me  if one basically had a bunk for himself  not too overcrowded  and there was some food available and what was not available I was always able to either steal or I remember there was one of these fake banks that they have and I would go there and they somehow took pity on me and found even a pair of shoes which I did not have up to that point.
There was no food  it was very bad in Israel then  everything rations.
They didnt live with us but they used to eat with us.
I did all kinds of work to get some more food.
Let's say  people from our unit  our barracks or building had to go to the kitchen to pick up food for us and barrels and that was always a way of communicating.
And  of course  you know  I found...found a place where to sleep  where to food.
We didnt have no food and we didnt have nothing and people go to the bathroom and God knows what else.
And whoever needed  you know  a meal or something  well our meal consis ted of potato soup and that -- potato soup  herring and some black bread and that was very good.
The people  they get good food  they present they went to certain barracks  they show what they get  and and then  when they left  the torture come in.
I went a few times to get food  because otherwise they they were saying  she has a rifle  she can you know  I wanted also to to go and do something.
So  this last entry to Rumkowski could have only meant that he to ok it there and got some sort of a reward  which meant additional food  a loaf of bread  whatever.
So the next time she told me to get a loaf of bread  and I was very happy.
Children come to school without food and we should set the example to the world.
And so  we had no idea what would happen to us.
I was assigned a job in the ghetto in the food department.
So in the morning we woke up  we looked around and there was clothes all over the place and food on the stove and food on the tables and clothes all thrown around  blood in the snow.
Mommy was  you know  cleaning ours hair  and this and that  and and I remember how she say  oh tomorrow we going have a medicine  and priest  and we going have everything and food and everything  you know.
What did you do  did you work while you were in the ghetto?
And Raoul says very quietly  \ Oh  gosh and just our two Red Cross girls are in there delivering medicine and food.\
But it -- She was very nice -- very nice people and the best food you can imagine  for sick people. [
32 Oh  I knew about my fathers whereabouts  we would try to send him some food with some other people.
It went so far that eh the the the promised those who would go to eh eh back to the countries of origin  you know  extra food supplies.
And we couldnt fall asleep  maybe somehow we fall asleep we didnt feel it  and in the morn ing  usually about nine  10 oclock  they used to bring us some food.
In the kitchen  the backyard  whatever it was  we were gone in the morning coming back at night.
Now after I met my husband  he was very busy at that time uh because they're managing to take care of many Germans who were...and naturally he supplied me with food  with everything.
No  not basically  just people who survived and if had two sisters survive  naturally they would stay t ogether or like my mother and I survived so we stayed together and we were just trying to get some food and medicine to try to get stronger so that somehow we could get  head back home to look for our families.
And so I could steal food so my aunt wouldnt be hungry.
And there was a man from that area who used to come every day with a sack of food.
Another image that I have from that time was  we lived on this food orchard  or or farm  for about a year and a half.
Only my father take some money and give to the partisans so we can buy food from monistares in the mountains  take about four months in the mountains.
Oh no  no  I just came with food  and -- and when he finished eating I would bring -- I would take the -- the pots  they -- there was a couple stacked up back -- Right. --
Your wife  you cook whatever and Eva should get some hot food.
Of course  after this horrible thing  there were miserable situations because firstly  we didn't have food.
But the...the Germans...uh...the underground...uh.. .became very powerful  not powerful   dominating in the Warsaw ghetto and....uh...the Jewish pe ople realized that there...that this is the only way now is to stand and before everybody was looking to.. .to find some food.
Erwin Baum 78 December 5  1995 Page 78 narcotics  no nothing and then when the raid is over  they come and they stuck a chicken feather in his eyes  ﬁOh you're still alive?ﬂ They threw the intestines in  sew him up and my poor brother is still suffering because everything is tangled up in there  so he's got to live on baby food.
When we talk about kosher food  we thought--I don't know--sausage and cheese.
She took some food that wa s available for her at that point  some dried meats and things like that to be stored through the winter   all the cash that we had at that time a nd all the jewelry.
For instance; we had no problems; we had enough food  we had enough things  we had enough things we never needed to leave the farm.
They said take along your valuables and a little food that you had still in your ghetto room and some water.
And working on the railways  theres always a chance to steal some food.
Water had to be boiled  you could not eat a ny raw food.
And and so was was there food still  were the stores filled  were did people go out in the streets?
I just remember we were 2 o'clock  3 o'clock still by the table  sleeping children because he run to the houses to see if this people had food.
They lost they left us without food  without anything  and we don t know if any where we are.
Well  first of all  we got you did not have food.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/PNINA TORY page 21 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: money and they gave us food  the Germans gave us food.
Well some people said they owe us money what they did to us.
And sometimes if I needed some thing    then because we couldn't buy  except a small ration of food in the cart  nothing  no .
That if people see a hungry child  not to offer food.
So people said that the material for the for the bread is the rest from food for horses  for cavalry.
So one of the tasks my mother took and also she was assigned later officially by the underground movement was to find people who would be actively involved in smuggling food to ghetto  either from country side by her knowledge of the farmers who were parents of the children which she was teaching at the school.
and it was food  which they said they -- was as -- that time I wasnt su re if they will receive the package.
And then we take the children to a Greek restaurant  so they can taste a little food.
I mean  they locked you up during the day  but did they give you food  did they take care of -- did they give you medical attention?
I was pretty scared of all those animals  sometimes I was so scared  I climbed the tree and waited until they disappear  or Edwarda Rorat 14 February 25  1996 Page 14 when I carry some food with me  I gave it to dogs and they ate it and then I felt safe with them.
Now  came a time that I have to help her with food.
There was ration of food and so we  from the farm  we bring to my brother food that way uh just on the bicycle or I walk with the basket...put bread and uh salt pork and uh butter...also same way.
And thats we stayed til th e liberation the Americans came in with the farmers approval and knowledge   because he caught us a couple days earlier  that we ate the food what they were serving to the pigs.
And secretly they Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 7  1997 60brought us early in the night  some food or something like that.
We picking up food from different places  from restaura -- from bakeries mostly and from stores and we bringing it to the soup kitchens.
And sometimes my father would bring something from where he wa s. And thats how we lived.
The farmers come with food  with everything to the city  exchange for clothes  for equipment to work on th e farm for appliances  for stuff like this.
Would that affect food di stribution because  if saying th ere were X number  but there were more–?
There were a lot of mice running around at the time  and rats  so whatever food I wa s left with  I had to eat it as soon as it was brought up to me.
The French workers that we worked with  the French worker I worked with shared his food that he brought with him...they used to bring a lunch bucket and they usually shared an apple or something like that.
Now  thats a long-term myth  that they put in something in the food.
And he could not understand ho-how you wait at table  giving food from the left and taking away from the right.
And that two should have no food and the third should have food?
It happened several times  you know  the prisoners watching the cappos or the SS women eat regular food and then thinking that they ate it  or imagining that they ate it.
He was  like I said  seven and a half years old  but he looked like a two years old baby because he was like a skeleton without having food for three years.
Exactly what I needed at that point  but I came there  I was introduced as their friend from Kolomyja and it was a lot of festivity going on  there was food on the table.
But we had a some kind of soup  I think  to we were fed  a little.
And they promised us good accommodations and good food in exchange for work  which it sounded very good at that time in our condition.
So what they did  some of them got out and they killed them.
>> Bill Benson: Susan  I remember you telling me that they would tell the elderly people that were with you who were going to put you in a fish factory where you can work indoors.
So when we got off the ship  they took us  accompanied us in Santiago  to a place where you live and get your food.
Your father is doing slave labor  your mother is tryi ng to get food and youre attending school with your brother?
It was terrible  cause there was no food  no water  no toilet facilities  no nothing.
And I learned how to write grants and then only the last 10 years had to do with food because I was in nutrition and cancer.
Sure enough a couple of days later he comes up with a whole tray with a little steak and other things and I almost died because all these  our poor prisoners  got only water and you know the regular food and here I had a steak  but I guess mothers will be mothers even in prison.
But then we went to Russian Jews who was  my sister was engaged to their son.
