The ot her interesting thing is that we had with us a down comforter that when we escaped we t ook with us from the 07:25 ghetto  a pillow and a down comforter.
Were you at all in a position to help peopl e in the ghetto by sm-smuggling in food  or anything?
But we -- we were hungry but we were not starved.
And we liv ed in house of a cousin who lived in a street which belonged to the ghetto.
The way this relocation was handled was that first one had to secure a place to stay in the ghetto.
Oh  yes  there was always a black market in the ghetto  yes.
So what happened was that we came back to Poland so we travel ed by train from Samarkand back to Poland and we came to the city of Warsaw .
You were lucky  you were not fa four years or five years in the in the ghetto  like us.
Irving: In the small ghetto there remain ed about two or three streets left from the ghetto.
Even the Judenrat was also in the ghetto and they used to discuss what to do next  whatever they want.
We had it in the ghetto  in the basement in a dry place and we used toŠwe were in touch with a Russian lieutenant and he was working in a village near the forest  so he had cabin that he made in the woods  so we used to bring it in over there.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/CELIA YEWLOW page 23 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: Did you have a friend in the hospital with a baby?
Once the ghetto was sealed  were you in the same apartment then  consistently  or were you still moving around?
because when we got back to the city  you locked up in the ghetto  you just like a -- oh  a closed -- closed world  you know  you -- you -- th-then it depressed when you come home  when you come to the ghetto.
Some a little food we got  we ta ke this to the ghetto because to the ghetto in Kolke  they give in one hour and must take everything you want in one hour and come to ghetto.
Because she had anjus that my brother made her and then they -- and then they chased her out  you know  from the ghetto  sh-she forgot it  she wanted to go back in  they didn't let her look for that  which wouldn't matter anyway  it was -- would have been only for a few days  because after -- after that  after we arrived  they killed her.
And I took them and I brought them to the ghetto and there were a few for instance what for instance that's how I met again my husband because I had known him from before.
I remember two in particular  and all this was taken by the Germ ans before we came even to the ghetto.
I was taken inside the ghetto to the new ghetto Kommandantur  where there were a group of barracks -- seven  eight single-story houses.
And the police comes in with the rifle  where are you hiding  what do you think you are hiding and turns out a new  the Hungarian captain who was in charge of the whole ghetto and the whole everything  now he was spitting blood that my fa ther managed to get out his kids and his wife  with the help of an SS officer and not with his help and there was  that SS officer was ordered elsewhere and there was a new one in charge and there was a whole  again an American expression  a whole new ball game.
So I went back and -- from Berlin to Warsaw and I -- he -- he took care of me and -- and I -- thats when I visited the -- these piles of rubble that had been the Warsaw ghetto and took pictures  which were published in the army newspaper in Berlin when I got back -- of dug out dwellings where the Jews had been hiding and had been reduced to skeletons when they were found after the war.
But there are no woods around the Wars aw ghetto or around Warsaw even for that matter.
And then  wa -- then what was your next -- next thing that happened to you from the ghetto?
But I am the -- took soldiering before  when I escaped the ghetto  and I figured Im continuing the same way.
I remember there was a discussion in the house whether we should go...uh...the warnings were that anybody that the...the German soldiers are going to go through apartment houses...anybody hid...find...found hiding will be shot immediately  and I need to tell you that we had witnessed atrocities in the ghetto.
The very old people must go in the in the ghetto.
It wasn't hard to move out  some empty homes were outside of the ghetto.
>>Rae Goldfarb: The penalty for -- that they extracted from the people in the ghetto was ten for one.
And of course  the Judenr at hoped that they would be a buffer to help  you know  mitigate some of these things  and so -- and then in November is when we started to go into the ghetto  and they gave us [indecipherable] a deadline of 30 days or 35 days  but they extended that because they just couldn t manage to get everybody in that they -- and then on the way to the ghetto  they would pick out older people.
The Germans comed in  the Germans took away the quarters of our house  from our house.
It was after  when I met him  when I already knew about  what Vladka told me  you know  an d both of them  when Frydrych was killed 70 taking out people from the canals  after the Warsaw ghetto uprisin g  there was a certain village and they were caught and there were five people were killed at that time and he was among them.
He says go...go to the treasurer and tell him that I ordered to give the money uh to to to yes  and and this was the first gun we had in the ghetto  but this really was the first but not the last one.
And we had to go  but it was '44 the ghetto started.
Comparing with ghetto  it was ba d. Comparing to the other concentration camp  it was not so bad  you know?
M-Mostly I remember what we were eating  it was bread  it was the dark bread  a round loaf of bread.
Yeah the Lublin ghetto was made into a labor camp and a couple of other places.
What were your parents doing in the early part of the ghetto times?
In meantime  what happened within the in the time that the Jews start moving to the ghetto  the y were marry many atrocities committed by Lithuanians.
So I came into the I went to the barrack at luckily  next day  or a co uple days later  I was shipped to the Warsaw th ghetto.
So there was some contacts made with the Polish underground  per se .
In fact  in the Washington museum  I just got a book from the Washingt on museum  I left it in our museum  is you open the middle  and there is my best friend from ghetto.
When years  years later I was in Tel Aviv   and there was an exhibition of things from the ghetto  and and I recognized some of the things   and I said  I have never been to the Tel Aviv University Museum of of whatever  so how can it be that I say I have been here?
Himmler came and told e all that we and so all the Jews  every Jew  went the ghetto.
Immediately all the ghetto was surrounded by machine  you know  from the Gestapo and military and police and whatever you say.
So  we didn't have that and then an uncle of mine lived in that house too so we all moved into one place.
Now  there were a lot of resistance story  but the Warsaw ghetto  this is the emblem  this is the -- the -- the main thing that -- that you talk about resistance.
And late when she came to our house when we were in the ghetto and there were certain times that I brough t over things that you couldnt get in the ghetto  salami  a piece of cheese.
In 1941 41  I dont remember 41 or someth ing like this  because wait a second  wait a second  wait a second  wait yeah  the The ghettos Ghetto started in 1940.
And then I ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 18 found out what happened to the other people.
There  we were told we are going to move  we are going to live in a new place  and this was the ghetto.
In the end of 45  when we were taken to Auschwitz  we were in ghetto 70 000 people still  but those people who were in ghetto  there were 70 000 between them  there were only 1 500 people who went in with these 165 000.
We -- that was the purpose of bringing us to Krakow ghetto  to build  to show the Interview with Henry Kolber 19 people how to build a camp.
It was... for the 5 The Kovno ghetto was closed in August 1941.
Because every little word here was a page  was a horse whip that he was  who had in the ghetto a horse whip and who would dare to horse whip anybody!
I was in Hust  the name of the ghetto was Hust .
Like my ghetto friend Trudy says  ﬁI forgot most of the things  but you want to know?
They are pre  preparing sandwiches  tea and a program from the works of the ghetto.
They wanted to interview her for the museum and the one  the youngest son who was in the ghetto with her parents.
And still  had you been aware in the previous spring  the Warsaw ghetto uprising in April 43?
They had an area a -- the main street  the -- the ghetto  two or three streets shorter  till one da -- this was all -- yes  till it was summer 42.
Anthony: Were there any Germans living in Bedzin before the war?
And later came my cousin  and to this ghetto  12 Victor.
If you were if you were caught outside the ghetto without with without with no stars Interview with Sol Mackler December 28  2009 26 Yeah.
And...uh...the first shots of the undergroun d were for the firs t time heard in the Warsaw ghetto.
They brought in all the gypsies they could find into this ghetto.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 14 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: full-fledged Tin Smith.
The only way you can come out of the ghetto if you show the guards the ID number  the ID card  you went to the factory and worked.
It was so at night  we went out  look for food in the ghetto.
So we was here all the time till the ghetto was cleaned out and after the ghetto.
maltreated  then of course that they went to they were taken to ghetto.
So everybody in the center of the of the ghetto in everybody that came by should have si looked at his name was Mac  and I think I Im sure that Im not Im sure  but I know that Kalish has a picture from that  which she took with this candid camera.
Then we were told that we will have to leave our apartment and to move to a section which was designated as ghetto.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 33 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: 4th.
Then they organized the ghetto  they organized the ghetto so he was responsible for the Jewish should have where to live.
We couldn't trade anyways so something to bring in to ghetto so they took us back and that Lithuanian woman was wrong when she said every nation or anything.
You see the Judenrat was formed  and then Judenrat was basically the admi nistration of the ghetto and the people  and they were responsible for all the demands made by the Nazi authorities or whatever.
And  uh starvation  tremendous amount of starvation  and again  at that time  my father  because he was involved in  in community service a lot  he was chosen  and we moved  when we got into ghetto  we moved to the cemetery  to the Jewish cemetery  what this is quite big  there used to be a house there  where nine families used to live all year round  and they took care of burial of the dead.
There were deportations but it was not as terribly gloomy  and uh  and first of all  we were not that hungry  somehow everybody managed to eat in those days of the ghetto.
So  after being there two days  we sneaked out of the Ghetto and continued our trip to the Russian side.
Tell us about the circumstance that led you being taken out of the ghetto and where you were taken from there.
So what I did  I went up as close as I could to the fence  and showed her to the German soldier there  that Im here on a mission from the ghetto  go to this and this building there  just to check on something  and I am coming out right away back.
No  I was not in the ghetto when it was liquidated  so I dont know anything  its just what I heard  it all was hearsay.
It was a few months  not too long  a few months  and then they started the ghetto.
Because I was going to some of these men who were with us  dealing with the of giving places to the ghetto dealers.
You are going to get a shower and a uniform  and everything you possesses if somebody has something from the 68 ghetto  whatever it is.
He was forced into the Lodz ghetto and there he died in the Lodz ghetto.
The exhibit is opening the 19th and 20th  I believe  or the 20th and 21st of November  a nd we're going to be in volved in making sure that the survivors of the ghetto get to the museum and the busses take them  and then have a hospitality suite that we're going to have for them.
So that meant that you were able to avoid being encl osed in a ghetto  is that right?
And it were times when I tr -- when I -- you know  I used to go out from the ghetto on my own risk.
Because I remember standing right next to it when the people from ghetto in rows of four started coming out and very slowly th ey were marched with the SS men and the dogs and the whole business.
Other letters that I have in ghetto slang  that reveals the panic there  which in fact Im gonna write now a article about postal history from the g-ghe tto during the war  it reveals the pain and the suffering of the Jewish people.
Somehow  they probably knew they were going to liquidate the population sooner or later they pay no attention so schools open in ghetto so I finish in ghetto.
Then he was--in the war--in the war  he was released from Dakow and put in the army and the uh--I happened to mention that I have a child--he don't live in the ghetto  so--so he brought--one day he brought me a bag of sugar and he brought some flour  I think like that.
All her family...the parent s  their father died from hung er in the ghetto.
110 There were just three of us  that was a normal apartment  but we didnt stay long  because the -- the ghetto was made completely small  and you had to move on.
Im talking about not the uprising in ghetto -- Yeah. --
We couldn't sustain all the people from the work on the farm  so the majority of the group went to Czestochowa  and they established a kibbutz there on Berka Joselewieza One  in the ghetto of Czestochowa.
And the rabbi who married us  I didnt know him from beans  he was my mother-in-laws rabbi.
That evening  as we were coming back from work  blocks and blocks away from the ghetto we heard cries  such cries I hope no human beings will ever hear.
The -- I spent the time in V ilna in ghetto.
Later when I came to America so I asked my brother  we got once in ghetto a package from Turkey  did you send it?
They were staying outside the Ghetto where the gates were and if you're walking  you have a permit they let you out and then they brought you back in.
I stayed in the ghetto probably from the beginning of Februa ry 1942 until uh – late in 1943 or maybe even the beginning of 44 and uh .. no  no  it wasnt that long -- excuse me  Im sorry.
As a rule the ghetto police were not terrible but we really didn't know whom we could trust.
In ghetto  there are still some candles which my grandmother had.
6 >> Bill Benson: Before we turn to Auschwitz  in the midst of all of those terrible conditions in the ghetto  you told me that you received a most welcomed birthday gift on your 13th birthday.
In the ghetto there was the Kleineverstaten and the Klei- severstaten.
We spent another night in the water and the next morni ng there was fire and there were screams and I heard babies crying and I guess the time they we re liquidating the ghetto.
Well  we start walking  and a group of Polish youngsters came after us and you know  \ Hey Jews from the ghetto  hey Jews from the ghetto.\
Now is this ghetto similar to the one in your town?
Krakow ghetto is also on the outskirts  or in the center  or where is it?
We knew that we had to move because in the part of the city where my aunt lived  the Nazis were organizing the Jewish ghetto.
Do you recall whether this was a newspaper put out by the Jewish council and Rumkowski or was this done by -- Oh  definitely within the ghetto.
I wouldn't be alive today if it were all of them  but a great number were and uh our part of the country was a very poor part of the country and I guess the the looting is what uh what appealed to a lot of the people  being able to uh to accumulate somebody...you know  take over somebody else's wealth and even though by the time we came into the ghetto a lot of it was stripped  but it was still some things.
He was -- he was allowed to go out in the ghetto  too  and come back.
It ha ppened so that un...unexpected at all  I had to escape from the ghetto and Pnina  my pr esent wife  arranged it without even telling me.
Actually we survived because we were in hiding...hiding uh at the time when the final phase of the ghetto was liquidated.
In my own company  there was a whole section of about 24 freedom fighters from the ghetto.
The order to report to the ghetto would have been in 1941  middle of 1941.
And we have a very beautiful synagogue in the middle of Budapest  and all the houses around it became the ghetto.
Then they were evacuated and then the ghetto was opened  you know.
You can help your family.ﬂ So at certain time every day in the morning  about five o'clock in the morning when the first streetcar pass -- because in the ghetto  Warsaw ghetto  it was a streetcar passing by the ghetto  but nobody can go down.
After you found out th at your family was Oh yeah  I was shi after I found out they come from the ghetto  and I was for one year I was crying.
And she lived there with the family ‚till June 1941  was established a ghetto in our town  so she was taken with the family to that ghetto.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 36 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: got pulled in.
He was the first person he knew that he saw dead you know in the ghetto.
Of course  I would have been happier back in the ghetto as uncomfortable as it was.
Should he and his family move to the Jewish ghetto or pretend he was  he was a Christian  and he finally decided to go there and probably that was his  his end eventually.
And there he said  ﬁI want you to take over the labor department because we have to register every Jew  every child in the ghetto because we have to give them work.ﬂ For work we will get bread and we can live.
Then they move us 24 to start to go to the right and they move to the right  and certain three  four lines away from the front and I said to my mother get in the back because  you know  you find out you are going to the right side  and then we walk in the ghetto.
My parents spoke Yiddish  and of course I never knew I could talk Yiddish until I got into the service in Germany.
And they paid to a Polish man what he was bringing the bread to the ghetto  to the court.
But luckily in our ghetto  they did not ask for a certain amount of people to give them out to kill.
In the ghetto we lived in another house  we crowded with other people.
They went on -- yeah  th-the -- well -- well  the resista -- in the ghetto -- the resistance in the ghettos is -- this is resistance.
So my mother didn't know what happened to us  and she s ubsequently went into hiding for a few days in order to be uh out of the ghetto so she should be uh  uh reconnected with us.
And it did a good job later on in the  in the uprising and the  during the uprising in the Czestochowa ghetto.
It was it was far from the ghetto  but this was a certain area in Budapest uh in quiet a little circle  and this was became the name the protected ghetto.
This was when the Germans were going to actually round up the Jewish population?
You mentioned that maybe once or twice  you were actually inside the ghetto.
He didn't  he came back a day later  and I went back on the second trip I went back with him and the ghetto was still smoldering.
Then also they started a uh  a workshop  a big workshop  ----------- in ghetto itself.
I made it  I got into the ghetto  the ghetto  Pietkov ghetto did not have any gates  they have just a big sign.
th at was their names  theyre safe  theyre in Vilna and in the Vilna ghetto.
And then when did they did they feed you once a day  or week  or In the ghetto they fed us once a day  lunchtime.
The pe ople had assembled there  like I said  but some people  they really went for work outside the ghetto.
But my question is  by that point  the ghetto is obliterated.
And I know -- I dont know how we knew that the building has a hole in 51 the roof  and we can go out to -- onto the roof  and from the roof we can jump to another building which doesnt belong already to the ghetto.
>> [ Laughter and Applause] >> Bill Benson: So Anna  you were in the ghetto for a short period.
I remember it was  I remember it was a winter there to take care  and after the Germans come and they make a ghetto for this camp because there was lots of barracks there.
big ghetto or were already separated and had gone on to Treblinka and I kn ow that my neighbors  young people  a boy and a girl  my age  went with their grandparen ts  in a wheelchair  so obviously I knew what happened.
Our house was situated in such a way it was a gated area fronting the street.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/PNINA TORY page 7 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: (7-1/2 IPS 10 is up) (Sound 10 mark) So you were telling me about PT: So  so you asked me about uh few people flew from the ghetto because they didn't have where to go.
We all had to march by there to teach us a lesson not to bring home anything to the ghetto.
My sister  who married in the ghetto  Zunder Leizersohn  who was one of the first partisans in Vilna ghetto.
Because I -- if my father wouldnt take risk  we wouldnt be alive  because it wa s during the -- you know  the ghetto time  it was so many times that he t-took ris k  and I-I-I -- and he stay alive  that I-I-I-I -- I -- I dont -- sometimes you know  Im thinking and I dont know what is -- is it  it was a luck?
He went over to Mengele  he said  looked for him  he said  \ Ich bin--I am the head of the Lichmenstadt ghetto.
We lived in the ghetto  even before the ghetto  they lived there too.
Were people  once those things started  tell me what those things were  and once things started  did people know what was going on in the ghetto.
In fact  to go from one side of the non-ghetto area to the othe r side of the non-ghetto area they had to go through a street  which ran right through the ghetto.
They know where to block them off to keep you within the premises of the ghetto.
Life in the Rachen on the occupation and with the ghetto and Univad in full swing  brought new problems and killings day by day.
And also the horrible thing was to see  to know that  seeing all the things from some families brought beautiful thin gs because they were not in ghetto  they came in and many people were rich.
It was you see  those  those walls that surrounded the ghetto were hollow inside  you see.
At first they formed two ghetto s. We were lucky in a sense in the beginning that one of the ghettos that they formed  we lived right on the premises.
He wrote a book during the ghetto time that was called ﬁMal ches Ghettoﬂ ﬁKingdom Ghettoﬂ  and it gives a story of the church on the Platske Chernya   and the people who go in and who go out.
So  naturally  pe ople came into the ghetto with whatever valuables they had.
13 Between the first evacuation  when you come back to your apartment  until the ghetto is closed.
Now  besides th e barbed wire in the ghetto  they had patrols patrolling all the time.
The Jews were located like in a--I would say  a ghetto.
And after all the things what happened  what I lived through the ghetto and the camps and everything  and I saw this  I believed there is something above that watches  above both of us.
I  of course I was never in the ghetto  but no  those who were in the house  they could stay  and a lot of other families moved in  pr actically all of them connected to famous Hungarian doctors.
At one time in that little ghetto there was a–they announced that there will be a list of people who want to go to Palestine.
They lived under the ghetto and at night they would go out for products and stuff.
So  very  very shor t time after  we were on our way back to Warsaw.
I was the enem y of these people that said for Wittenberg to give up and to not to rage and to fight  not to fight back because the ghetto will be destroyed.
The little place Ozerkoff where I was born and I lived until the war came and until we were transported to the Lodz Ghetto.
Oh this was after Hitler marched in but before we were taken to the ghetto because this was when we were in our home yet.
>> George Pick: Everywhere we went  in hiding  in the ghetto.
And the ghetto  you know  I don't have to explain to you what a ghetto is  we were isolated from the whole city.
>> Nat Shaffir: First of all  we left the ghetto and we got a house.
And as that colonnade of people marched and marched for hours  he was lying there  then he felt himsel f alive  just bleeding  so he crouched  he approached a house he knew in the ghetto wh ere he had worked somewhere and 50 he saw a baby in the firepl ace.
He doesn't provide specific details about what it was like in the ghetto or in the camps.
To go to the ghetto  I have to pass the cemetery and I arrive in the middle from the cemetery.
70 03:49:41 So  as the ghetto was burning  life was going on as normal on the other side?
The place was open  it was winter  we were not well dressed  and it was really a  a  uh  uh  it was a  it was a miserable place  it was  it was hard.
But we cou when when we had to go to work  or go out out to the ghetto  we werent allowed to go out [indecipherable] we have to go like the horses  on the street.
I knew very well Warsaw  but since they separated small ghetto  a big ghetto and here you could go and here you can't go so I was really was very mixed up.
When I came Zolkowyski  they told us you can go two ways where a big Jewish ghetto is.
It was like a...like a river of people earning the way to the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 14 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: airport and my mother always made sure he had an extra sandwich with if he worked with somebody that he shouldn't see that he is eating well and uh the other one not because  first of all  there was no refrigera- tion where you can keep it and second we always knew that tomorrow I bring again in something.
In the ghetto  many families in one place so we had to sleep on the floor.
TP: Yes  people who came--the following day  the more people came from the ghetto who they found in those bunkers and that they were.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 29 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: (Crying) I saw my--I saw my brother coming and I spot- ted him.
Although  I understand from some cousins of mine that when he was in the ghetto  my father arranged for him to get married in the 39 ghetto.
They start to talk about ghetto  and  and they made the ghetto.
Also  th ey organized the ghetto to be supposedly  quote/unquote  ruled by the Jews themselves.
First with illness of my grandmother  later in ghetto everythi ng was completely different.
I remember that my father  whenever that there was something in the family  they us ed to come  they wi th Mazur  he knew everything  he was  he felt that he can help  he felt th at he can  so was the most helpless person in the ghetto .
That was about  I would say in August 18th when they after the closed the ghetto.
And this kept me...kept me going in order not to go out from ghetto  not to get out and...uh...be worked day and night over there and use up my strength something else.
Interview with Henry Greenbaum December 20  1999 20 I didnt see any suicides in the ghetto.
Like their going to divide th e town  not the town  but in the middle of the marrick they use to call it  middle of the city or the town or the stet-ill   and they're going to put us in the ghetto.
And through them I found out that my uncle  who lived -- they lived in Lodz  he died in the ghetto  Lodz ghetto.
In the way  the Germans began to bomb and bomb and bomb.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/ABRAHAM RODSTEIN page 10 Interviewed (early May 97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: And they must have also taken some people to the 9th Fort and destroyed them.
There were some people operating  were buying certain thin gs and selling on the other side of the ghetto  and I myself being that I looked very Ary...typically Aryan...I was blond and slim and when I was young...and I...we had an ordinance incidentally in the Warsaw ghetto that everyone of us had to wear white armba nds with a blue Star of David.
Now I know that it was because we were squeezed into a smaller area and also there were people brought in from other places into Warsaw ghetto  and therefore there were so many people and so many hungry and dead and cold people and there was nothing that anybody can do.
And ghetto I pass by a ghetto I had one loaf of bread.
So  she went one day to the ghetto and went into a rabbi and asked what should she do.
So here we are in Di nawarkee working very hard of course  then one day we formed a friendship with about five or six girls  an d one of this girl was a poetess  and there were two sisters  they were from Lougue(p h)  from Poland  and when Lougue was occupied by the German  they escape to Vienna and like many others they in the ghetto and we formed a very big friendship with them.
It was a ghetto set up especially for -- Yes  it was a ghetto  just exactly for the German Jews and the European Jews.
One side of the ghetto  I don't know if you have the picture -- Bill Benson: We aren't able to show it here.
So did my little brother used to go out and I too  for the first time went out to work outside of the ghetto.
It was safer for us to go back to the ghetto.
This part of the ghetto probably was empty  and we went to the temple and we stayed there overnight.
And yet  just by virtue of where you were already living  you were included in the ghetto.
Yes  sure  I was too young to work in the ghetto.
And I cant te ll you it took 45 minutes  an hour  I dont know the time  how long it took until we got to the ghetto.
In the period of th e ghetto  were there cultural activities?
Did you teach him how to protect himself in the ghetto?
All the ghetto inmates that were left were sent to concentration camp  Kisavold (ph.)
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 30 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: country and Lithuania was agriculture and people were coming to spend their vacation because food was so much better and tastier than in Germany.
13 warehouse of confiscated goods and valuables (German) 13 03:20:18 So  this way  our organization got bigger  then we got in a radio which we took out from a tank  a broken tank  and we put it together and we got a radio inside the ghetto.
And all the day-long from 6:00 in the morning til 7:00 in the evening when everything was gone and 10 000 were taken out of the election  of the selection and...uh... this was a great...the greatness of a man who stood in the hardest day in the ghetto and he tried to do his utmost to ...to ...to rescue whom he could.
This was the first encounter  and then there's the second one was in the ghetto.
>> Bill Benson: It wouldn't be long  would it  Regina  before you and your family and other Jews in Radom were forced into a ghetto.
No work.ﬂ It took an hour  and the police the Jewish ghetto police came into the cour tyard and took her away.
There was certain involved activity in Ghetto during last six months before  maybe eight months before  to organize and build a hiding place where you would hide in case -- we had enough knowledge that war was coming to the end  somehow in case they would decide to liquidate the Ghetto  everybody would have a place to hide.
I went out from the ghetto with my sister  we took off our rags  we went and we got some -- some blackberries and some bread  what I ask some of the peasants to give us.
And that really saved our life  because otherwise these people would think that we were lying  that it was simply a trick to get out of the ghetto  but this whole case with all the things was buried was ther e. It was broken up and empty.
It was in the area of the ghetto  but they took from all the Jews  and people start coming in the next day.
And one time I remember they took Rumkowski outside the ghetto and he didn't come back until the next day  so we had feared for the worst.
They asked everybody their background  and I said cabinet maker  and they said whoever couldn't prove that he is a cabinet maker  but my brother also had certain position in Ghetto which was better than going to work in building the factory  the airport factory.
So in 1942  early 1942  weŠthe whole family  as a unit  that means father and mother and six children  went on and reported to the ghetto; or smuggled ourselves into the ghetto because we were no longer legally able to turn ourselves into the ghetto.
My father  my mother and I--and my brother was not with us at the time uh I don't know where he was but he was somewhere in the ghetto roaming around on his own.
They disinfected the clothing  the places there  the clothes; the Germans did this.
I also remember wall to wall beds and that the table was set up and everybody sat on the beds  because that was in the ghetto  probably the the last seder in ghetto.
I honestly dont remember a servi -- Im sure th ere must have been something  and as I said  I -- one of my uncles was in the ghetto.
There was...this was called a man's...man's ghetto  but in my... in my particular line in that thing where we...we was was mostly old people  old women  mothers with children  with little children.
06:27:32 We were the ones that didn't believe in defe nding the ghetto  because we thought the most it would do is kill a few Germans  but otherwise we'll all be killed out and nobody will survive.
Nothing could encourage me more to dare and to escape from the ghetto.
Now according to the books that I read  that was when the ghetto was being liquidated  in July and August.
04:27:01 Can you talk about the last few months when you think about 30 000 or 40 000 people left in the ghetto before the last deportations or are there more than that?
You see  my uncle became the the head of the parama   of the bread distribution  they used to bring in bread and and they used to considered a very honest person  you know  they and of course  he had a few people working for him  and they would come in and and get the distribution of the bread became something inside inside the ghetto.
I was in the Kabelwerk at that time  I mean I was working in Kabelwerk  And after the liquidation of the ghetto  then th ey built barracks in Kabelwerk and we were there  we were not walking to Plaszow any mo re.
MG: What--when the ghetto was closed  a couple of days later  they came and they looked for silver and gold.
But when this other  they left to the domestic people to take care about the ghetto.
But when you got there  did you find Interview with Irving Schaffer October 19  1993 33 We found out  thats correct  we fou nd out what we are doing there because its that si the big sign said Warsaw whatever  I forgot the name  but it was a big sign  big sign  it said Warsaw ghetto  or whatever.
We had to leave the ghetto at night and tell the people how to get out from from th e job that they working.
My parents are alive in the ghetto and I...I need some money.
The Jews couldnt board the the streetcars to get out from ghetto.
While we were in the ghetto  that chicken laid an egg every single day.
And I did sp end much time with Volin sky who told me all about the problems with even names of some m ilitants  and I got microfilms and I was the man who brought to London a report   a Jewish Militant Organization  written after the ghetto.
It was in the Warsaw suburbs; I dont remember even the name of the -- I for got the name but it doesnt matter.
The majority of the population of the Ghetto did not want an uprising.
Did you have any idea what was happening in the camps?
In ghetto  my father  as much as he could  with the minimum uh  possibility that he had  kept up whatever he could  as far as religious uh things to do.
When it was decided that you were going to burn the ghetto down  and I don't know who's idea this was?
They said they were going to take the Jews to a larger ghetto because the frontlines were so close  supposedly for our safety.
She was what's called a \ Jew house\  not a ghetto  but the Jews were -- from Hamburg were all rounded up there  waiting to be deported.
That was before I went to Marianske where Rumkowski sent me to the girls and then back  I went back to the hospital  which was my last stay in ghetto.
Until uh.... By the way  I also met my wife  that I knew from the ghetto  in Austria.
Because they were afraid they should not atta ck the Jews .
And then we were ordered to vacate our premises and move i nto a makeshift ghetto.
>> Bill Benson: David  how long was it before they created the ghetto in Kozienice and forced you and your family into the ghetto?
It would be too small probably but theres a ghetto in 1944 in Nyireghaza.
You didnt have to be in ghetto so as long as we tell you.
And the reason for this was that there were rumors that from Theresienstadt  who was proclaimed as special and prominent uh ghetto  yes  that the people were deported to the east and killed.
When I looked outside of the window  there were buses lined up in front of the gate and I could see that the Ukrainians and Germans were taking the children into the buses.
from here on and you should prepare for the relocation to the east.
Its a -- a line-up of six men standing ag ainst a building  and -- and the caption says  ﬁExecution  Warsaw ghetto  1942.ﬂ And the man who Mr. Helmer is pointing out is -- is im -- pointing to -- has his hands over his ches t  and -- and looks as if hes crying out.
One of the questions was when you were living in the ghetto  was that in Chadbush?
They liquidate the Jewish people in the ge -- in the Wilna ghetto.
but the population was so angry that before of -- that several hundred of you  how many were we  400  the whole ghetto will be shot.
Now  she was in the Vilnius ghetto  Vilna ghetto  or I think Vilnius ghetto  but she left it  she She ran away.
If they -- if you di dnt go to work in the factory  they came in with the trucks  picked you up in the -- theyll pick you up in the -- in the ghetto  load you up on a tr uck  take you away.
What sort of a Jewish Community was this town  was it a large community?
What was life like for he r  for your grandmother in the ghetto?
And and when when eventually the aktion of 1942 took place in RG-50.030*0580 25the ghetto  at that time we had to go to the to the yard  and they were checking the apartments to make sure that they are empty.
01:29:35 Ok  the approximate time I can know  because my birthday was in March and I remember when my uncle told me the story how it was decided that I come out of the ghetto.
Is there -- do you think -- maybe you can't answer this  but do you think there was something different about the experience in the ghetto or in the camps for women  in general  versus for men?
I think they knew when we were there that the war  now looking back on it they didnt keep us long in the ghetto either.
Shortly after we arrived  they sealed the ghetto and they started the transports to Auschwitz from Grodno}.
That city at that time was already surrounded by fences; and it was a ghetto which USHMM Archives RG -50.030*233 11 11 was served as...which served as a transient station to...to evacuate the people from there again farther east.
But I had an address of  Blancka gave me some address on High-lit-ska Street and I went there and I made up a whole story and sh e wasnt there  I hoped to meet her  and without her and being all alone  it was the first experience  a ll I wanted the next day was to go home  to go back to the ghetto.
We had to  we had to undress complete naked; and they searched for valuables  and they  they said.... First of all  my sister gave everything away for safekeeping; because the neighbors all came in before we  went to the ghetto  and they promised that they will  they will give her back after we  we come back.
The life in the ghetto after the children selection was terrible.
It was not so near  but it wasnt so far  and I had to cross the bridge and to go on the other side to ghetto  Nowomiejska  I mean Zgierska  and so I had to cross it each day two times.
Do you remember how your father managed after smuggling the family into the ghetto  how he managed to explain to them that he needed accomm odations?
They were checking us to see if we were hiding gold in all the places they gave us uh  other prisoner clothes  and uh  and uh the whole life in ghetto to the concentration camp was like  again like day and night.
I was the only one who was strong enough physically when we went from the ghetto to back home to carry that suitcase.
What it was  it was actually -- they used to take a gaggle of people  in the middle of the street  and they just were shooting them  and making the ghetto more available for the next shipments.
And we decided to go to -- to Auschwitz  and to Kielce where I was in -- in the ghetto  and some other towns where I had been during the war.
And I said  \ I don't think if some Jews will risk their life to go out of the ghetto.
So it went on long enough  so actually people liv ing in the ghetto could go into that store and get -- Yes  they -- yes  yes -- -- if they had gelt. --
And in the middle of the night  she took me to her place where she lived  not too far away from the ghetto.
And when they start to break into the ghetto and round up all the Jews near the synagogue  I tried to run ou t from the ghetto on the the same spot that I used to always sneak out.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 13 So we were picked up  sent to the ghetto.
Was there more than one ghetto in -- I -- I -- well  I dont know.
It was going on and when ditches -- going back to the ghetto -- I was not going to work.
And somehow I intercepted that letter which came to the ghetto that my two brothers--the older brothers  Adolph and Emil--were both perished.
Like you saw in \ Schindler's List \  this little girl who was hiding in the toilet  I went -- the toilets were  let's say  outside of the ghetto.
They made a fence around the ghetto  and where we get close to the fence  could be shot.
But did you know sort of what the structure of the other camps were or did people come from those camps to you and tell you what it was like at the different camps?
This is the very suburb where later was the ghetto  that on on the very beginning  on the...at the night of June 25th to the 26th  the Lithuanians massacred thousand Jews in the Slobodka...in the Slobodka suburb.
Still have dream -- so that s -- the screaming reminds you of it -- the time in the -- in the ghetto [indecipherable] Yeah.
So that time I about two weeks later  a proclamation from the from the Arrow Cross party and the Parliament came that you have to move in the ghetto.
She also smuggled a gun with us when we left the ghetto in a basket.
And every day thousands and thous ands died just from malnutrition because the Germans didn't give anything for the people in the ghetto to eat.
So it was the easiest thing to take these people to take over the management of the government of the ghetto.
No  I think it was the consent of all of us that we dont go because  and that Briesen factory went to the Warsaw ghetto.
They thought it was going to be a ghetto and soon the war is going to stop.
You couldn't get out of the Ghetto  but nobody bothered you.
Our hou -- because its -- it was the section there  somehow -- we had a big house  like it says  a pound way back in it  our house was still in the ghetto  so we remained -- we still remained in the ghetto.
Within days the city of Lwow  where you lived  was occupied by the Nazis.
And there were rows  long rows through the streets of Kovno on the way to the ghetto.
But th-the soon the Germans occupied  then beginning the ghetto  and [indecipherable] in between and they were moving  and the results  and So the Germans occupied Sighet  and and they created the ghetto.
This school consisted of both the per -- teaching personnel and students  of remnants of people that were in the ghetto.
And he was about 2 months he was in the ghetto worki ng  and we were working other places.
Major  I   should I stay or go?ﬂ He said  ﬁStay.ﬂ So I took wi th Lotte this cart which had all the belongings of the 11 of us and we took it out of the streets leading to the railway station into a part of the ghetto we were supposed to leave the next days.
Tell me what you remember about the forming of the Jewish ghetto and did you see anything when the Ghetto got formed  and did you see people get rounded up?
If I am taken out to go for this treasure  I would like them to come with me at least out of the ghetto and wait some place ou tside of the ghetto until this all materializes.\
So here I am  four oclock in t he morning   out of the ghetto.
I don't know what he was doing when he went from the ghetto to work.
And at this point a group -- the whole -- all the people from the ghetto are gathered in a field?
When we escaped from the ghetto and uh on the way  we stopped at at her house and uh she hid us...I don't remember for how long  whether it was hours or overnight and she went into town to find out what happened to him and uh she told it was not safe for her to keep us because everybody had...knew the connection and she had just come from town inquiring about him.
107 Thats right  you could  you know  you could buy bread and other st-stuff with the ghetto money  yes.
They take them out in the morning for work and brought them back when it was dark.
I considered myself a member of the ghetto  and I have to live like everybody does.
No  no  it was not like tha -- bef -- before we went to ghetto it was no stars  but it was very dangerous to walk the street  especially the men.
There were I think 6 500 Jews lived in that little ghetto  liquidation.
And also  even though we were established in that ghetto  we had to wear a y ellow star identifying us as Jews with the word \ Jew\  on it.
They ask  ﬁWho is a carpenter?ﬂ So  my mother said  ﬁHe is a carpenter.ﬂ And I had a piece of paper that I could leave the ghetto  before it  in order to go to my work.
By that time I want you to know that everybody was hiding in hiding places.
He said the Caravan starts in a field in midnight  pass the outskirts of the ghetto between 2:00 and 3:00 in the morning.
We got more food  that the ghetto was not built right away  but I remember in 1942...I don't remember the date...Gros said Herman  let's go.
I didnt mention yet that there was a -- the gendarmes was -- were watching outside  and inside was a ghetto police  established by the Council of Elders and they looked like -- under the cap and the -- and the yellow armband identifying them as a police.
There was a point in time the ghetto was liquidated al ready and now there were rumors that the concentration camp is being liquida ted.
And I point out this thing that happened to me in the ghetto.
Because when I  the first time  in 1940  to the end  did try to escape from the ghetto  save myself with Polish papers  the problem was circumcision and I remember my mother saying  why do we need this  how many Jews would be saved if not this?
And the same as when I went out of the ghetto of the gate.
He explained that he thought I was his long lost sister and he was in the Warsaw ghetto.
But I think that I am alive  now  this is not a choice  but he did see to it that a lot of young people from our ghetto  from our area  that they were sent to Germany to work.
And so we managed to take uh--but the--the--the uh--some of the jewelry that my mother had helped save our lives a little bit because my mother use to uh sneak out from the barbed wire fence through the--at night and barter with the peas- ants for food and bring food us uh because the food rations that we got in the ghetto were very minimal.
03:07:37 So  he lived with me until the ghetto was destroyed  unil  maybe 1942.
So how is it that you got out of the ghetto to go into hiding?
One was  she -- she asked you a question in the early part of the interview and you said that -- she asked you if you had been beaten while you were in the ghetto in Kovno  and you said no  youd seen other people getting beaten  but you were never beaten until you got to Birkenau.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 16 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: time and they took those clothes along to the work places out of the ghetto and they exchanged it--the Lithuanian people use to come with butter and uh margarine and potatoes and sometimes even some meat and they exchanged it.
In Ghetto  after I wake up  if I ever sleep  is gone for the lines for a piece of margarine.
But you were outside  a nd you got out of the ghetto.
One little boy asked me one time what was the colors of your ghetto.
I had to move that's why they closed up the ghetto  closer and closer  to have the people as I told you in one place.
I meant to ask you one other question about the ghetto.
The same thing until ‚42  we got the job  my aunt got the job in Kabelwerk work and we marched from the ghetto to Kabelwerk every morning  itsŠwas a cable factory  and there were different departments there.
I have from the camps  going fro m the ghetto into the camps  letters  Interview with Morris Rosen August 5  1999 75postcards.
She knew moving to these houses or to the ghetto would mark her forever for the next step.
Yes  because they felt that outside the ghetto was more dangerous.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 17 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: working places because there wasn't so much demand.
He he I wa his father was a policeman  he was no in the ghetto  wasnt always negative.
So he said of 500 cam e 534 and the very same day they took them out of the ghetto and they killed them.
It was the ghetto uprising  that's the time it started the whole problem.
And this was his greatest and most horrible heartache  when one day he arrived home  because we had these safe houses  what they called the International Ghetto  what it wasn't  it was given to us and not bought  by Christians and Jews who didn't wanted their houses and villas on both sides of the Danube to fall in Russian  in uh  German hands.
The Jews were located like in a--I would say  a ghetto.
They were liberated from the ghetto by the Soviets in January 1945.
And... I'm curious what your dail y life was like in this ghetto  could you go in and out?
You leave the ghetto provided you got a pass from him.
You you couldn't go out of the ghetto and it was very  very  very hard because nobody was prepared for that.
And the time we heard also that the liquidate the ghetto and that was the time when my cousin came and we 22 had...we saw in the morning even the men brought us in burned pieces of paper from the ghetto when the ghetto was burning  like from seders or from Torahs.
So it became like a ghetto within a ghetto  you know.
So between So you were in the ghetto for a year.
It was not a big loaf of bread  it was a small bread.
And she  and it was interesting that peo ple who were escaping from ghetto  they either tried to be in countryside which was easier to hide.
Yeah  yeah  a Star of David on the -- on the left side  on the -- you have to wear that  yeah  Star of David.
You might very easily do that in Ghetto if you can help it.
And if you didn't have any papers in the ghetto  you couldn't work.
It was a -- a lot of people  commotion  because people what -- were coming fr-from th-the manhol es around th-the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/TED PAIS page 31 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: had--they did an official--they had their own synagogue but they use to get together and play and they was no Matsa--Matsas for Passover but I don't know  some people use to mo--when they get flour  use to make Matsas for themselves so.
He died in ghetto in January 1941...or may it was in 42.
No  I don't mean then  I am talking now in the ghetto.
What happened  my father was working and when he came back into the Ghetto  he couldn't locate us  so he found out it was the action.
Did you ever tell your sons about what you had to go through in the ghetto and the camps?
By the way  coming through the ghetto  the German dropped us off  the same guy that told us we would -- Fritz  it was Fritz  not Hans  it was Fritz.
The ghetto police had to go with them in al l actions.
>> Bill Benson: In the place where you lived  Konigsberg  how large was the Jewish community there?
End of Tape #1 11 Tape #2 What else can you tell me about life in the Warsaw Ghetto?
There was a curfew for everybody but Jews had an earlier curfew.
When we were shipped to the Ghetto  she wanted to take him.
Sylvia (Tzywia Lubetkin) was in the ghetto and was with us on the Aryan side of the .
I have to tell you about how my mother left ghetto.
It was a sister from this couple what I went out together from the ghetto  from the Warsaw ghetto.
And then...then we couldn't go a nymore with the train so...because it was very dangerous  so we started Jawisowice kitchen and Jawisowice was already a ghetto.
There were 3 buses lined up  in front--our--the window of our apart- ment faced the gate of the ghetto and uh I saw buses lined up on the ghetto and there were--there were uh Ukrainian soldiers that had joined the Nazis and Ger- Video Tape No.
Selling old clothes  selling a pa ir of pants  buying a pair of shoes  you couldn't even buy food on the street in the ghetto.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 3 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: because the Germans were in Vilna a day before than Kovno.
Many of these people were taken from the ghetto to the slave labor camp and did not survive.
When did you  in the ghetto  realize where those transports were really going?
They took boys from Paszow to look over and to check out the ghetto if nobody is there.
They hid on the corpses  on the ashes  and they found their way back to Warsaw  to the ghetto.
We came in the ghetto  just a little clotheses   a bl anket  you Interview with Carolina Taitz January 24  2010 19 know.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 30 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: there I mean--there you didn't have anything.
And we went to the building of the Judenrat  I mean like the government of the ghetto [indecipherable].
In uniform  looking very much the Nazi -- well  the -- the German officer that he was.
And I remember that  you know  before before the  I guess ghetto  and an d the destruction of the Jews  our family doctors were Jewish.
Because the the creation of the ghetto was in around March of 1940  so Ah  I I thought in I thought that maybe we were we were there a little bit before  I dont know.
Some think that document -- some that were liberated  what they remembe r. 5 >> Patricia Heberer -Rice: And so can you remember what it was like in the ghetto?
>> Bill Benson: Manya  eventually you would be forced  with your family  into a ghetto.
We could exchange for goods what we still had  till it got from one to another that they decided that we had to separate the jews from the gentiles and make the ghetto in the city.
I went to Lemberg [L'vov  or Polish: Lwow]  and I come in this place and begin to come...there in the ghetto where I was...I came to Sarny  I came to Kolki  that was mine...mine place.
We are at the point where Mr. Chanoch is describing to us what life was like in the ghetto.
Even they were in ghetto  they still couldn't believe it  that tragedy what waits for th em it's unbelievable.
So tomorrow I came  was no more cheese  was closed the ghetto and thats all.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 29 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: when it was dark and uh the ghetto was not uh miles and miles.
And...uh...she was such a celebrity that...(sigh)... celebrity...that in this same year--1942  August  a very memorable time for...for me  for us--we were...orders were posted all...all over the ghetto that all the Jewish inhabitants of the ghetto have to come to the stadium.
But the ghetto in Lvov   was that in the center of town  or a part of town?
We endured the worst  Warsaw ghetto  but he managed to take us out.
how -- how is your life different from before  when the Germans werent there?
During this period  prior to the ghetto really being formed  even though it isnt a closed ghetto  do you experience a lot of fear  knowing that you have to be in the house  even in spite of the fact that you love schooling so much.
You bartered clothing for food whatever you co uld and you smuggled food into the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/DAVID LEVINE page 15 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: were in the ghetto.
Did you have -- within the ghetto  did you have any special assignments or roles within the underground movement?
But coming back to my father  when we were in --.Well  theres nothing more to tell you about the life in the ghetto because I would go on --.
I just want you to say what you told me for the record  which was essentially  that your family was in the ghetto  you  one of the youngest  were out doing things.
8 Well  the most important is during the liquidation when we were running from the transports  we were trying to stay in the ghetto  not to go away.
What about the Jewish police  were they good guys or bad guys?
An d this is Mr. Char-no-broder   youll find his name in the ghetto book.
Not too long before the liquidation of the ghetto  the Germ ans knew exactly what was going on.
Now did you  w ith your family  did you observe religious holidays and go to the synagogue regularly?
So this was until 1944 and then in 1944  of course  the Germans came and there were some places the Ghetto and then we took assumed names and after I gave up being 'Anna Voyachickola' we all went to hide in this apartment of this custodian of this ink manufacturer.
>> Bill Benson: What were the buildings or houses like in the ghetto that you were living in?
He never knew it  because they -- he was going by a different name  and he didn't know it that his grandmother was Jewish  and he was with the priestly clothes  taken out from the church  and he was in the ghetto.
crying) That was very well...That was very well the end of the ghetto because after that day  (crying)...whatever hope I still had was gone after that day and we were resigned to uh--to our final destination.
Uh the whole ghetto real...uh really didn't like him very much but he he uh let us in and so we were happy there and with his help when the aktion star...in the area started  we we decided to build our own bunker or our own front.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 24 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: Let's wait for a minute and get another roll on and talk a little about-- (Cut) (Sound Roll 25 Next) BS: Wentworth Films.
And the wife with the little children were staying in the ghetto  lost and didnt know what to do  and finally they went to Estonia with a group  and they were killed  too.
At night through the forest  we went close to the ghetto.
Oh  was terrible in the ghetto this time  was terrible  because it was -- there was a -- like a few different group of the people in the ghetto  was terrible  because some was pretty rich Jewish people  and some were -- most was very poor.
And here am I alone  in the street  prob ably the most dangerous place in the world for any person  right across the railway statio n. With the ghetto flames coming right our way  there was a sewer next to me.
We were seven people in the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 10 house.
I was le ft all alone in the ghetto  a teenager  15  16 years old.
I was working a Lodz transport  people came in from the Lodz ghetto.
When I came to the ghetto  and I was told and I saw with my own eyes  of how the people have to live in the ghetto  and naturally I was right up in arms.
He was an activist who was writing day by day occurrences in Warsaw ghetto.
Tell us what it was like in the ghetto and how your family was able to manage once you were forced into the ghetto with the remaining Jews from your community.
And that may have been why there were very few if any suicides in the ghetto because there was always a community spirit.
They took us to the police station at the entrance to the ghetto  an d inside the ghetto to some kind of  I remember  big room and they started to ask us for documents and what we are doing.
This means punishing the whole ghetto because he got angry about something.
I was so small  but we entered the Vilna ghetto and we were with my sister and brother til the liquidation of the ghetto.
That obviously saved the people  my life  my fathers  mothers  my relatives and the 7 000 people who were still alive in the ghetto.
They had one large ghetto and they had one small ghetto.
Also a wagon  you know  a sled came from -- into town.
When were taken to the brick factory  the kid was arrested and taken to the brick factory  he didn't go to the ghetto with the grandmother  he was taken to the brick factory and just saying this doesn't illustrate anything  point  but I don't know what happened to him after that.
I have to send you two.ﬂ And we came to the meeting and sat and meantime at the meeting  there came a guy from Warsaw ghetto.
That's what they...and in the evening  they took us back to the ghetto and when we was there  sometimes somebody give you a piece of bread or...or a carrot  sometimes beans  you know.
They wanted to go to Palestine  but how can you enter Palestine?
So  I imagine - I dont know what year this was  but we were still living in the so-called ghetto.
So we asked this man to go near the ghetto and see what's happening.
It was 220 000 people registered...uh...Jews registered in the ghetto and every...every day was...and we saw through the window my uncle.
Are there any sounds or sights or even smells today that trigger memories of the war to you?
But in Lodz ghetto  for instance  where I was  it was impossible.
Did you go to -- did you have friends who were not Jews?
At the end of the ghetto period  when we were taken to concentration camps  subsequently  still survive the concentration camps.
My the th-the wife of my uncle from Poganica was in the ghetto in in the in those listings of pop and movement s of population and so on.
So some of the people  when they took the right action to go to the left  they took them to the--to the small ghetto.
When I was -- well  the ghetto was liquidated in the 19 Lodz transport.
I went always to different Post Offices and I sends  in this way  to the ghetto  some parcels which arrived.
I kept...I...a day before Yom Kippur  my father came into the factory  to the ghetto.
She couldnt understand it  she ment -- she said  oh yeah  she was afraid  but yeah  and thats it  then we went to ghetto -- to the ghetto  and started a new life.
But  you know  people would look at those lis ts and also append their own queries about the whereabouts of their families  and who went where  and who is likely to have been in this or in that ghetto  or who is likely to have information about the fate of individual persons.
They...the SS decided to make a ghetto in our town  in Vilno and there a poor section where a lot of Jews used to live there and the Jewish home for the aged was there.
September 1  1943  the ghetto  our German ghetto was completely surrounded by SS during the night.
He was in action in Warsaw  in the ghetto and he ran away from the ghetto and he came to the woods.
The Germans went back into the trains  and the ghetto police explained to us mostly in Polish  and hardly anybody spoke Polish that we had to walk 43 into the ghetto.
So -- and towards the evening  we sort of were told to go to get ready to go home  to go to the ghetto.
How long did it take before the Germans put all of the Jews into this ghetto?
They fought from outside into the ghetto  when there was a point of fighting  yes?
The Germans su rrounded the ghetto early in the 42 morning  shooting and shouting and creating in [indecipherable] fear in everyone.
Did you notice any difference in the way in which the Romanians and Hugarians behaved toward the ghetto and towards the Jews?
Was the rabbi any kind of leader that the people listened to in the ghetto?
And so I was really...my prognosis were really very bad  but...uh...one day it was a few days...must be before the liquidation to the Vilno Ghetto  my aunt who was a nurse came into my room and she said that she heard rumors that the German gave against our commandant  you know  to mark them that they need more Jews.
Uh  people were again being taken to camps  but what happened in August  and now I understand that  uh  we were  there was  there were orders post  orders posted all over the ghetto that on a given day  and it was in August  I don't remember when  I remember it was a very hot day.
And did they have  where they happy  how could they be happy in the ghetto.
Everybody who came in back to the ghetto and they pushed us in a big synagogue.
17 Tape #2 I was mentioning that as far as I understand it  there was a lot of organization in the large Ghetto.
Because I left some uncles and aunts in the ghetto and a lot of my family in the ghetto.
And we went through Poland  but I heard that all my family perished during the resistant in Wa rsaw ghetto.
01:12:30 And one day before we knew it  we woke up and the gates of the ghetto were closed  everybody trapped.
It's made of wood  and lined with some paper  and on the back of it  it says  \ Ghetto Theresienstadt \  and the date of my birth \ 23rd of November  19\  well  that was in ‚43 23rd of November is my birthday  and it was given to me on my 21st birthday 1943.
I pleaded  all I want is to die with my people in the ghetto and no argument really made sense to me  I wanted to get to Kolomyja and I wanted to die with my people  and he kept saying that Ill never get to my people  you will not be able to get into the ghetto  they will shoot me at the station  and nothing penetrated.
And after that  in Auschwitz again  the first time  when I worked for the Kapo that   the Kapo was somebody my father had known before  because it was a man who had been in the gh etto with us in Kielce and was shipped out of the ghetto to Auschw itz two years before we did.
And that was finally wa - who -- whose told the -- I mean  the authorities  they s -- they says what he does  he was arrested and he was hanged  publicly on the pla -- on the -- before the ghetto was closed  he -- they asked everybody -- the people to go and see it.
And then one day  he met somebody and they and they told him they are looking for a pharma cist to look in  to work in a pharmacy because it was the Jewish ho spital that was in the cent er of the ghetto and they needed a pharmacist.
And we stayed there for the duration of the Ghetto or you may say for the duration of the Jews being in that little town.
The -- one of the first things the government did was to replace the stones in the -- on the steps of tower of Kaunas  to 75 take all these cemetery stones  gravestones away and put the o -- the other ones  not to go on those [indecipherable] th-the 23rd of September  which was the day of the liquidation of the Vilnius ghetto was announced as the day of genocide  and it was an order to -- to put out all the flags  Lithuanian national flags with -- with a black -- [indecipherable] ribbon. --
But in the beginning  you you didnt know what what it what it to do  or not to do  because we now  the last decree was that all Jews have that was already a month later  in August  that all Jews have to come  and theyre making a ghetto  surrsurrounded by barbed wire  and this ghetto  all the Jews have to trans-transport themselves  for their own means  get us a horse and buggy  and and travel to the Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 27 ghetto  which is in   in Slobodka .
Because they had to put the Jews somewhere and they didn't want them outside.
You are Jews and how come we are out of the ghetto.
BART STERN March 8  1992 We got taken out of the ghettos (coughs)  or actuall y  the particular ghetto we were in  and herded in groups of about 5-600  and were to-told not to take more than just little hand bottle???
I think they took us away in the morning from the ghetto to the railroad station.
And was  was executed everywhere  In all the  in all the places in the ghetto and in th the  in the satellite.
And I was waiting in...with the ghetto went through that...was 30 days until the Germans were occupy Warsaw because we were...defending Warsaw.
And  finally there was like on this limited place  like almost half a m illion Jews living in terrible conditions  living on a  on a nutrition base which was below the subsistence level  attacked by dirt and hunger and soon the other killing factor was typhus which was rampant in the  German  in the Warsaw ghetto.
So they all left with the first liquida tion of the ghetto  and anyways  that's how I spent my time in  in camp  with the stories  and the encour agement  and the  the love that my mother was able to give me.
And at that time Jews -- there were orders given that all Jews  you know  had to go and register to go to the ghetto.
And ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 23 then we started out.
I recall these bodies in the littered ghetto  they were littering the ghetto.
>> Bill Benson: At what point did you get forced to move into a ghetto?
He was a businessman who never did very well  but when he came to the ghetto he was already nominated to be the elder of the Judenrat .
They crossed the walls  they built the walls  they closed the ghetto  and nobody could get out or get in without special permission.
AT: the Jews from Eastern virtually should also call into the ghetto.
Q. Now  let me ask you  was it easy to get in and out of the ghetto?
And I think late in 1940  I remember  the ghetto was organized in Minsk-Suwatki.
So these farmers somehow got word to my father and said  ﬁWhy don't you wait on the outskirts of the ghetto and watch the last two wagons.
But uh  you know  we remembered the good things much quicker than the bad ones  and along the way when we escaped from our ghetto to another ghetto  uh we were helped by gentile friends of my father's.
Unlike in Lvov  for example  89 where -- where there were just volunteers galore  you know  to -- to help to enter the ghetto.
And I wouldnt eat  I came home and I barely dragged and my dad said  ﬁWhats the matter?ﬂ We were still in the ghetto at that time  ﬁWhats th e matter?ﬂ I said  ﬁDad  I cant eat it  they serving trayf.ﬂ So it must have had meat in there al so.
Well my grandfather found out that the Nazis from Mr. Borecki who had found out from his son  the Nazis were going to burn the ghetto so he got the two volunteers .
The next morning afte r the Seder  I walked out from...from my...fro m the cemetery and I went to the section of the ghetto and I really saw the ghetto burning.
But it was a -- a hospital which was also a municipal hospital.
Not the very latest from the city ghetto  from where my mother  my father  and my husband was taken out now.
Now when you were in the ghetto and you had to do clean up work for the Germans  did Boruch have to do that too?
But being that the highway had to go through the ghetto  so each uh--each part was individually uh wired or--or uh fenced in.
We couldn't believe it because this was on th e third of the ghetto.
It said in that period of time  there were no registrations  everybody was going -- especially from the Wa rsaw Ghetto -- everybody was going straight into the gas chambers.
You had to wear the Jewish -- the Star of David?
