He said  \ stories \  so I started the children's story  and in the meantime we ducked  and somehow we survived  and I took the children  the child to the nuns  and next day the parents went back  and under the window they brought her out  but you never thought of being afraid because that was the strength  that was the most wonderful feeling that you can do something.
I suppose the kind of work you do here in keeping the memory of of those of the Holocaust alive touches very closely on my work as well  and uh so I have frequently interviewed  of course from a literary and historical perspective  uh those who uh either survived  for example H. D. Adler who survived in Theresienstadt and has written a book about it - I've interviewed him.
Now you can get out.ﬂ I was amongst the very few young people  if I remember  13 young women in that building they ever survived.
Of course you want to know if somebody from the family survived.
So our group was essentially the out of the three groups  our group was the only one who survived.
The first -- first day when the German arrived  you know  on the [indecipherable] place  you know  they stop me  the French gendarmerie did  was the French gendarmerie and I was so upset  you know  because W-Warsaw survived -- surrendered  it was the first or second day  and the ger -- the -- they [indecipherable] the people you know  to cover the holes  which was where -- was for the [indecipherable] the bombs.
Can you talk a little bit about age of the people who survived.
I consider myself on the whole as having been very fortunate.
In Buczacz  this family that we lived with  their daughter had survived and I did get to s get to see her in the United States eventually  but Im not really sure.
And he was in Poland so -- survived the war  and then he came to Canada  and worked as a doctor.
So it was nevertheless a Jewish school -- Yeah  that's right. --
There were Jewish kids who were returning from Russia  or Jewish kids who lived through the Holocaust in Poland and survived.
Nobody starved in th e forest  but we didn't have enough to eat  but we survived.
Later on still begins a long story  but thats one of  this is how Menek survived an d how he depicted it in his statement about the last night in Kolomyja.
Anyway  the one who survived Auschwitz then married another survivor of the concentration camp and they were shipped out to then Palestine  and he established a sausage Interview with Al fred Lakritz April 3  2008 6store or whatever in -- in -- in -- probably in Haifa if I remember correctly.
That's how I survived from going to the crematoriums one time.
That was the one most important thing for all of these people who survived  of course.
And these children had survived in hiding -- but not only children who had survived in hiding.
This was the oven - I saw the oven in Bergen-Belsen; after the war we went there an d I don't know I wasn't on the list the I survived  my younger sister too.
Really  I didn't start sort of facing the reality of the war and what it meant  and sort of the reality of trying to survive  until probably 1943  because in the ghetto still  when we survived the first in 1942  when they  when they dissolved the gh etto and sent most of the people to Treblinka.
And him asking of do I know if anybody else had survived and -- and telling me that he was going to try and bring me to this country  that he wanted me to come here.
Which is  my parents were in hiding  and they survived til I think it was 45  wasnt it?
But her son  Muttel  who was my father's friend in Europe and had survived the war also  and was my father's friend in Germany  he lived with his mother  Mrs. Feldman.
Life was very hard but still we survived better than .
I -- I believe four people in that -- in that picture survived the Holocaust.
My father  uh  luckily  because of him we  I survived  uh wo rked in uh as a fire  fire dept  he got me a job to work in the ghetto rather than go outside  outside the ghetto  where the suffering was more  the hunger was more.
And there was another girl who survived as well  and I knew her  and the two of us decided to leave Poland and go to the camps.
All right  maybe she would be a -- a divorcee  or a -- maybe shell be a little older  but she will have two houses  she will have a business  you woul dnt have to worry  you wouldnt have to start for scratch  why do you have to marry?ﬂ Now  I couldnt understand instead to be happy  that I brought over my wife  that she was prettier than they  she was more intelligent than they  she was smarter than they  she survived the war.
By the way  the girl he married  the whole family survived.
And it wa -- she didn't -- I -- Im not in these pictures  but I said to myself  my God  if I would have fed her with al -- with this tragedy when she was young  I know the kid probably would have not survived  if she couldnt deal with it at that point.
So maybe 600 all that survived from the 16 000 of the Jews in Poland.
When did he Interview with David Schnitzer 6 July 17  2013 And my father had to take over the factory because he was married just that time and my fathers   my mothers entire family moved to London just before the  the first war and my entire family  from my mother  they survived in London because they were raised  I mean in the schools and so on and so on and my mother  since she was married to my father  she had no chance of going with my grandfather.
Some survived who were drafted to Russian army and they survived in Russia  because like I mentioned before  we didn't have any concentration camps.
Crying) You know  they try to... also to help me with food; or when I got this terrible dysentery and a touch of this typhoid fever  they were the ones what sent--through some guards and workers what were assigned to that camp--some charcoal tablets and  uh  uh  some medication  so that I've did survived.
The only person who really asked us about our survival  how we had survived  it was very interesting  it was someone who wasnt Jewish.
I had a good friend who was in my parents and me  we became good friends and he survived the war.
One of th em two sons survived and came to America afterwards  Jakobowski was their name  and he was one of the leaders of the Ghetto  too  and his father just fell dead while the door was opened and we carried him with us and he was cremated because they had crematoriums there too.
We went down and I will never one room and it happened that this apartment  I met later a woman who survived Russia  was her parents apartment.
Its amazing how people survived and were right away active and organized schooling for children.
I thought only those people who had survived the camps  the people -- th-th-the -- the displaced persons  the people who had the numbers carved on their arms.
She sat next to a lady and the lady said  \ I wonder if the mother of this child survived.\
When the Lodz Ghetto was formed at first  you still lived outside the ghetto for a while  didn't you?
However it was I survived  it was it was none of my doing.
Some survived the war and lasted long beyond the war  and some brok e up with the end of the war.
It looked like they never aimed at churches or big synagogues because that survived in the city in Rovno.
And interestingly  quite a few of them survived becau se of the place where they lived.
And we were forever grateful that he was so positive  you know.
Its for the liberation of Buchenwald from the children that survived.
Seems like Monyek and I and quite a lot of other [of] us survived it.
And when we walked  each one like wild animals went there to collect a beet or something  and those beets were our supplement provision  which we survived.
They send the money every year  the people from here who survived  and they take care of the That place.
Who is still alive in Vienna  who was  she was the daughter of this ma n who was killed in and she was brought to Auschwitz and she survived Auschwitz.
And that's how - I don't know how we survived - so from Bergen Belsen we went to Burgau ph290  they send us.
Well  they were still alive at that time  but as I know from other peopl e who survived  that the ghetto was liquidated September 28  43.
We always run eagerly to see if anyone from our family had survived.
And I said I lived there  but I had a grandfather living over there.
It's a lottery and you have to take it the way it come s.\  I don't think she quite buys it and she feels ill equipped to have survived the same th ings that I survived  which  you know  no matter what I tell her about it  that I don't know how I did it either and if you had to do it  you probably could do it too and nobody knows in advance.
I think they survived in hiding  they were baptized  which was later revoked  and they could tell a very good story  too.
The ‚nother guy was -- one of the J-Jewish guy was a doctor  and he told me this way  ﬁYou will be survived  dont worry  I have to steal from German some medicine.ﬂ I dont know what medicine was  because was no pain [indecipherable]  was nothing this time.
The pogroms there were...you know...uh but somehow we survived and in 1920 the Soviets were pushed backed from Warsaw...the the Poles call it to this day the miracle of the   and uh we became  Poland became a normal so-called democratic country.
And I had a heart attack several years ago  and did not You never know how that thing is going to go out  and I did [that]  survived that one.
It was a pity to look around the Bema the people what survived the war.
One final question before I do that  George: Of the very large family that you had  how many survived?
Then he was  the Polish army was nothing for them  so the Germans  the Germans took him to Germany to our concentration camp and he was there  we was survived  he was liberated by the English army.
Well  I had known from my work with OSS and from contacts I made in London and elsewhere that there were Germans who'd been in concentration camps and who had survived who would make supposedly pretty good witnesses.
If I survived that day  I thought to myself  I'll survive the world.
There were charters already put up in the Jewish center and the temple there and we looked if our father and brother survived.
We got a telegram in early June  I believe  from America  from the United States   from my uncle  the one who want ed to adopt me  telling us that they found us through the Red Cross somehow  and that theyll happy that we are survive that we survived  and th-that he and his wife had a son who was born in 1944  and they are fine and happy and we should write to them  and we did.
What efforts did your family make after the war to try and find survivors?
She sort of entered  this is how we survived the war because she was able to earn money.
I never know what happened  if he vanished  if he survived the war or not.
And just when the ghetto was formed  this was part of the ghetto.
But when the Germans came  of course  then they came up.
So And at that time my father  he survived the whole war without being arrested  but at that time he was arrested by the Russians.
Now people ask you survived; it's a miracle or you are lucky or something.
They know that I am a child that survived the war.
Maybe that kind of a thing can be cleared up or helped through some therapy  just to understand that there's no guilt in having survived.
But the Holocaust survivor  when hes lost almost everything -- I mean some of my friends  theyve got -- they had families  they had siblings a nd theyve got not one member of the family survived  you know.
You see the Polish people in St ree  in Ukrainian there  they helped more Jews than in the other parts of Poland.
>> Fred Flatow: If I think -- none of the people who were still there when we left survived.
And again  how I survived I cannot explain it  because a lot of people in my position were shot  hanged  I survived  I have no answer for that.
And the two of us decide d to go back to my hometown  and -- to our hometown and to find out maybe some ot her people or our loved ones survived.
What would happen if I did meet her  if the If she survived. [
I mean we -- that much we -- because everybody knew that nobody from that -- from our home people survived  that went on that train.
U nder this number  I survived and endured unbelievable dehumanizations  beatings  screams.
But more than that  over there  in the ghetto  I don't even remember how we survived there.
I survived and I'm registering myself in the Jewish community of Krakow.
We were we were in hiding  I mean in the ghetto  in the cellar.
Tell us a little bit about what you can and the events that led up to your liberation.
All of my cousins otherwise  but the other -- my brother and I and I think four  survived.
She survived the war  I think  but she was in the hospital with us all the time.
So the freedom was -- it was something that I dream t about  hoped for  envisioned  and it was so different and so bleak and so heartbreaking  that on that ship I said  I survived so many years under the German rule  concentration camps  I lost my family  Im going to die in the middle of o -- the ocean.
What kind of encounters did you have with the Germans in Kos?
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 22 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: there  I was with my wife in a different section of the ghetto.
Boy  I knew from th at question that I was cooked  and I tried to explain the best I could that it was not really a crematorium it was just our way of trying to carry out our assignment and realized that assets to the benefit of those who survived.
She lives now in Washington  D.C. Survived the war  of course.
It was just a matter of circumstances that I survived after that.
You go tomorrow to the authorities of the Ge rmans and tell them that you are my wife  you survived in a camp and I didn't know where he is and he doesn't know where I am.
And the seven people  they just didnt want to cure them and do an ything  although they would have survived.
So  I started to ask questions and their name was Weissburger  so I stopped someone on the street and I asked  ﬁDo you know where the Weissburgers live and did any of them come back?ﬂ And the person said  ﬁOh  yes ﬂ he said  ﬁthere are two brothers that survived the war and came back ﬂ-- excuse me -- and showed us where to go.
To hel p. And it was upon a time that when we survived  that I said  I will never help people.
And this is a couple who is a first cousin of Father  but they survived  they [indecipherable] and they could go  but they are both already not they are they died both  but their son lives in Vilnius.
Comparing each others suffering  telling how it was  talking about how by miracle we survived this selection and that selection and in a way  I think this was really beneficial to us.
There were ch-children -- children from -- from ghetto who -- who even survived  they were dying.
And I also know that they my mother had a brother her brother  and he survived the war.
I never saw her after the war  but I know she survived.
I would have neve r survived without hi m. First of all  I would have gone with my father  and second  I didn't know how to do it.
And did sh -- [indecipherable] from which we survived with -- Right  in -- -- in the partisan  and -- And did she come later? --
But yet -- But yet  I did it  cause I wanted to live  and I wanted to survive.
Maybe three or four  but I th ink two survived and took their babies.
Would you have even worked for the Germans if you had been free?
I not only didn t  if you want to know how easily I survived.
I was trying to keep myself alive by seeing that I survived  you know?
And every day we went to check the list of the people who survived  and who came from Lodz .
And very few survived there  i-in there  in particular the first deportation.
So I was hoping both these two had survived  but u-unfortunately no matter how much I tried  I did not I did not find my sist er  but I  after awhile  investigating and chasing around  I found out that my brot her  my older brother was captured in the Russian prison  survived and he is waiting for me in Czechoslovakia   Chust.
When you were already working there in that did you know that your parents had survived?
She carried the prayer shawl   which was amazing to me it survived.
So this is one of the  my personal history that I feel that the only way that we really survived is because he had passed away at an early age.
Unfortunately  my father died in '62 on cancer  but he survived because of them.
I was  of course  constantly  ‚cause all the time those transports would go out and I survived.
Although  unknown to us  a cousin of mine  who still lives in New York  was alive but we did not know.
When they made a show for the new students the way I survived  every doctor go by me  shake my hands and they said  you surviv ed from Hitler  now you survived again.
Had I been separated at that young age  I don't think I could have survived or would have survived.
He had lost most of his family during the Holocaust  but he survived with his parents in Siberia.
Typhus was such a contagious thing that very few young women had survived it.
I said  ﬁNo  I dont have no guilt.ﬂ I feel I had mazel -- I had the luck that I survived and because I survived  I have a mission that I have to tell and wherever Im invited  I go out and I speak as long as they pay my -- my fare or a hotel  I go out to speak.
In the morning  my mother  my sister and I miraculously survived.
And then they used to pick some -- find some Jews from the outside -- for instance  and somebody survived and they used to drop him in in the ghetto.
I had a feeling of  everybody knew  of impending doom  of th ings that were going to happen  but I wasn't totally wiped out or down in the dumps about it  I had a rather good feeling about it  and when it came time for our responsiv e answer to the guy that was doing the selection  my mother spoke up  she became the h ead of our family unit  and she explained to the guard that her husband and father work on the work detail at the airport  the aerodrome  and the aerodrome was an extremel y vital part and in order not to disrupt their well-being  and with her immediate pr oper response  we were allowed to go home as a family unit again  and we survived that selection where a lot of people didn't.
And I found out my husband survived  so that's all I want  just reunite me with him.
By the way his son survived with his father the Dachau concentration camp.
Yeah  it was a strange  strange world  but I was lucky that -- I dont know how I would have survived  probably never -- I wouldnt have survived.
Because I think that  not so much for us who have survived  but but for those who ha who didnt.
But with his friends from Lukow who had survived the war  and some of them had as partisans and so on  these friends who were in America  their natural language that they spoke was Yiddish although all of them were modern.
His wife survived and after a while she came over here an old broken woman.
Survived  thank God; but we knew nothing about Workman's Compensation  so we never got anything for it.
Yes  but these people who survived  we re not actually from Horochow.
And my girlfriend survived in Lodz in hiding with -- with her husband.
France was a very rich agricultural country  of course  especially in the south  a lot of fruits and vegetables  so we survived pretty much on [indecipherable] and [indecipherable] and asparagus.
I don't know what he was  but he uh...maybe he was Jewish.
When the war was over  did you make any efforts to find missing loved ones and friends?
I was told after the war that about 30 or 40 of them survived the ordeal of evacuation and death marches.
Two of them  one of them survived  but he couldn't speak any more Yiddish  he was given away to a 07:37 fam ily that hid him and converted him to  he spoke Lithuanian totally and when he was rescued  now he couldn't speak a word of Yiddish  he spoke only Lithuanian.
I me an  I finished -- End of Tape One  Side B USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0072 37Beginning Tape Two  Side A This is a continuation of a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Emanuel Mandel.
I happened to live in a ghetto because th ats where I lived when they established the ghetto.
He was deported  but the uncle of the brother of the uncle where -- who invited us to have our honeymoon in Berlin  he was married also to a non-Jewish German woman  and he survived.
So after the war  I went back to my aunt  who survived.
So naturally if you found a hundred dollar bill or a gold coin  took it put in it in the condom  sticked it up  brought it into the camp  and traded for a bread for  you know  some people had connection with Polish civilian people that they brought the kielbasa  salami  bread  a bottle of vodka  and that's how we survived all those months.
And then there was Sarai  who was 12 and they  they also  they survived on hidings like we did except I think they were  they were not out in the open the way we were.
In the camps also was situations when somehow we survived that we could be shot.
This this was uh first we were dosed with some uh petroleum  with water  you know  the disinfection  in January and standing there for hours so you can imagine not that many people survived after that.
Uh I don't recall much of uh the uh children that I was with uh except those a few a few of those that uh survived with me .
My mother had four sisters  so I was with three of them.
Those people survived that lived in Israel  and we saw them.
Interview with David Halivni June 13  2014 48 And did I think I remember in your memoir that five of your grandfathers children grandchildren  survived?
The building is even now thats standing  it survived the uprising.
Besides  I wanted  by any chance of all  maybe there was someone of my family  who by -- by any kind of way  survived  and if anything  probably that would be the place to meet them.
And th-then  another th ing was th-they suspected that anybody who survived during Holocaust must be schpern  spy.
I think the other reason is that th ese things should not be forgotten and those of us who have survived and who have the ability to recollect and express themselves about that have an obligation to put it down.
In this little city of 15 000 people  thereabouts  there was to be a nationalistic event to celebrate how France   right  had a future and France survived and France was in honor in f -- in spite of its defeat  in f -- in spite of its -- that they had cut th-the country in God knows what  the portion.
And this was the idea in ghetto and that's why I think the Kovno ghetto survived longer than the other ones.
If you asked me how I survived in those 12 woods for eight days in that cold weather and everything else  I can hardly remember.
And this man was one of the last ones to be shot so he was on top of the grave.
He came back after the war and he survived  but he was dispossessed of his company.
I survived with help of Germans  Polish people and others  so it was my due to make him survive.
He must have been strong to have survived all the labor and all.
Ive be en writing innumerous proof to the contrary  but he is an [indecipherable] and -- but he had made a significant contribution exploring a subject  and being able to distinguish the evil ones from the not so committed ones to the ones who were there agains t their will  but who somehow seemed to have survived the war  even though serving against their will or something like that.
I was in a DP camp for quite awhile and then I chose to go back home to my hometown  hoping that possibly my brothers or someone that had survived  had come back home and that we could reunite.
And really be happy I survived and dance for joy or whate ver people are doing when they are happy.
I was one and another Jew who lives in Chicago right now  found him after the war  he survived the war in Russia.
We survived thanks to them because they shot them they head them off of us.
I found th e -- the -- my mothers family -- my mothers brother with the family  survived in a village  not in our area  not in Lodz area  in the -- quite a long way in the kel -- Kielce area.
It was like cholera  you know  long time ago people died  not many survived.
>> Marcel Drimer: Her father delivered her and they survived there.
And I reconnected this way back with my cousins who are the only ones who survived in Israel  and reminded me that thats what he did  and very happy about it.
And h e knows that from the First War were the same thing Š they took us to Russia; and all of a sudden Š tell you Š some of them survived  some of them Š they were killed in the First War.
So I told him this  \ I survived Hitler and I will survive this too.
That night  if I survived anything  that was the--the--the Video Tape No.
I belonged to the generation  and there were many like me  who survived the war and did not lose husbands and children.
They  they survived under the pho under the Christian name  you know.
IIt -- What I remember  the best part of our lives was then the Zionist organization where we all came together with those who survived  and had weekends of -- you know  like camp -- like studying  and we danc ed  and we sang  and we ta lked every night.
What we had on was wet and that -- that was what -- what we owned  the few people who -- who survived.
She survived and crawled out nude and she ran to a Christian  a Ukrainian or Polish I dont remember what she said  and they kept her and helped her to get dress and wash and she is one of the survivors.
See  well people ask me -- everybody had a reason why he survived  had a legacy.
In any case  I went to that school  and there was one a one more half-Jewish girl in the class  and one girl who was a full Jew  and the rest were not.
You saw your parents go  now we start to feel how our parents feel -- like they're  theyre  theyre now parents that children were taken from them  they survived and the children didn't.
>> Bill Benson: So here's you and your brother now are with your aunt and uncle.
You try to take care of yourself wherever you can  and and now it-its something which you you survived  which it like I said  its a miracle thing  whoever survived  whoever came out alive from from those camps.
Q. Do you remember how you were aware that the War was over?
If we would have survived after that  I dont know  but the first thing is we would have shot him.ﬂ Just was -- I remember that encounter because this was a special case where we were all trying to blow up a train  and suddenly -- usually we were blowing up trains going to the front  and s-suddenly we heard somebody hey  a group of partisans  unknown to us  were sitting about a mile away  and they blew up the train  who were going to -- toward east.
So if  for instance  my mother would not have survived  and my father did not survive  and an aunt or an uncle or a grandparent would come back  they werent going to return me.
She said the traditional Jewish prayer of thanks to God for having survived to see that day as she saw the flames going up.
Anyway what I am doing now research on  in her books  if you seem to have the book  on page 276 there is an article  by (sound skip) by the name of Eugena Smo lkova that she was in Auschwitz and she was pulled out by an SS man and thats how she survived.
Actually  first she went by herself and found out Jews survived.
But help  yes  because in the concentration camp  I survived because the -- the guy who was in -- in charge of my barracks -- for some reason  I dont know why and how he -- he found out that I am pl aying the violin and -- and there was sudden-suddenly there was a violin.
But this was immoral and my brother was taken to the men's camp  and he managed to live through it somehow and of course he survived.
When you know you survived  when you know well  five years went away  you survived alone but you survived.
Because if I would be older  I dont know if I would be survived  because I want to take revenge on them.
There was one uncle who survived because he was working for the Jewish community.
Actually out of my entire family  when I came back to Prague  out of my entire family  aunts  uncles  cous ins  everybody  I was the only one that survived.
Now the children survived until until the marches at the end of the...of my stay in the camp and then uh they went on the marches.
He wrote her a letter we survived  would she bring us to America.
I  I don't unde rstand how we could have survived  but we did  with such a small amount of food.
It didnt change my way of thinking because it wasntŠ If I survived it means that I have good genes because the only thing I survived that I didnt get surreally [seriously] –sick and you have to help yourself t o live a better life  to take care of yourself rather; that helps a lot your mortality too.
Because the ghetto  at one time  people lived there  before the ghetto  they were homes  you know.
Very few  as we wondered all his time how is that three of us survived?
And he survived through the all all our being in Russia  and we took him back  y ou know  we took him to Teheran  and Ill tell you that later.
So --  but I would say anybody who survived for a long time was trusted  and thats how  for instance  we could arranged our escape from the camp because we knew all the prisoners and we trusted them and when they trusted us  and we more or less knew who the informers were.
Misha is the only one who USHMM Archives RG -50.030*0043 9 survived  of all the seven children. (
From the other  almost 3000 people of 2940 people only are the same percentage what in general per  about 5 percent survived in this bunch.
So that was incorporated into my regular lessons and uh Dr. survived the war and became I think a very leading post uh Holocaust uh rabbi of the Netherlands.
In the case of Stella  these were people who otherwise in all likelihood  would have survived the war.
And the other girls  you know  they all survived and I corresponded with one for sometime.
The only thing we survived is..was the basket which was still in the park.
And yet I st rongly identify myself as a Jew  and am very proud to be a Jew.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 24 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: Okay.
Do you think that  and it sounds like you're all very diligent in you're studies  I'm wondering whether because of the experience  because you survived  whether that was part of the motivation to do this?
See  the -- All the Holocaust survivors  right  that survived the concentration camp  and the -- and the how as they saw  that a human li -- a human life didnt have no value.
And once we were able to  my husband and I  as I told you  we've been there many times  too  and have remained very close to  not only Zvi  bu t we had three other first cousins that survived and ended up in Israel.
The violin is what survived because I took it with me.
And that's why it was children  those 12 children in the book   survived.
The fourth was a Mrs. Clara Stickelmacher  who had some kind of a job  and survived  was fou r. Eric Brill  who lived today in Frankfurt  who survived Dachau.
The other Jews who survived  did they also survive in hiding?
The one group drank the water immedi ately and the second group  such as myself  drank half of the water during the day and we used the other half to wash ourselves.ﬂ And I said  ﬁHalf a canteen of water would make you clean?ﬂ He said  ﬁNo  but I felt like a human being  I was still caring about myself.ﬂ And he said  ﬁAnd later on I understood a lot more about this whole attitude that Im not going to lie down here and gulp down everything  I am  even though I am full of lice  Im still caring about myself.ﬂ So that  basically  that was the attitude that saved  Im sure  that was who surviv ed.
You see hope dies the last; so we hoped that they survived.
At the border with the Vichy part  they were told to get out of the train  all  everybody and all the Jews that they could find  that was German  German troops there  all the Jews that they could find  they took them and put them on another train  that was a cattle train and they were taken out and then she disappeared and her husband survived Paris  so I met him after the war and that's how I know.
I was together with Renya and there were some other people who survived.
They survived the war because of me from the Lodz ghetto.
You can just say Leo Beck was sitting in front of you and yo u were going to repeat... Yeah...now th e story about uh uh... About how he survived.
After my settling in Krakow  the situation became clearer to me that no one survived.
And we survived so much  and everything what 21 he said it came out the right way so what can I say? (
And uh these were mostly appreciated so they survived because they were photographed and that  that uh we up  up the mountain to the ninth fort.
I split up with Lisa because her father and brother survived too.
In fact  later even in Theresienstadt  when survived  and then he came to Stuttgart also  and Dagaloff  and then we used to live together.
So and she couldnt believe that I survived  and she couldnt I didnt believe it that she will.
Then we were put in a  those that survived the trip were put in a column five abreast.
To those who may have forgotten  it is hoped that in this simple but moving poem  which was written by a child who survived the horror  the world and future generations will remember the unfortunate victims  the survivors and especially those who still have to live with the nightmare  with the sorrow of having lost loved one.
So theres one le -- 54 one died immediately  and the other one  Taloxe n  he survived  but very -- hardly wounded  but then he was taken to hospital first and then to prison  and then he -- he hanged himself.
THe old partisans would be -- concentration camp survivors  anybody survived by any other way and all that  so we get together.
You see  evenwhich they are here  from one family  the mother  the husband and wife a nd two little boys; they survived all.
There were not too many Jews in Italy  but as many there were  80 percent survived.
And she went to visit some concentration camps and she was in Auschwitz.
And I think this drew us a lot more than anything else  the four very close friends of mine  whom I knew from the illegal boy scout organization and  luckily  we all survived  we all went and signed up with the Communist Party and I think this is the first  or almost the last time  I ever we nt to the Party because  now we went to a couple of meetings and we were just bored to deat h  this happened to American communists  too.
Somebody came from the same hometown and they  tr-  tried to inquire whether somebody survived  most of the time they didn't.
Q. So most people that went to Studthoff -- A. Did not survive  except at the earlier stage when they needed working hands for the farm  and those younger people who got out on the farm  so me of them survived because they were not in Studthoff.
And he was the only one that survived in Poland .
>> Bill Benson: Do you know how many of your extended family perished through the Holocaust?
None of the -- 98 None of my brothers frie nds  none of my friends  none of the boys I knew survived.
Oskar Schindler reentered into my knowledge that he   in fact  survived and he lived in Munich.
Did you have -- were you in touch with people who were there  who had survived in Zagreb and -- Jews or relatives who had survived and stayed on  and did you have any correspondence or connection with them during those first 10 years or so after the war?
Y -- I think you mentioned in the first interview that you met up with some members of your family who had survived.
You cannot imagine what...to te ll you...unfortunately none of my sisters uh survived.
They had to find -- and they who either survived there on place  in place  by hard -to-believe conditions  some hiding in a godforsaken hole somewhere or hiding in woods  or being hidden by Sol Polish people or even Ukranians.
And if you survived after so many hours  they took you to the ghetto.
All I read about is people feeling guilty that they survived.
It was like cholera  you know  a long time ago people died  not many survived.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 11 >> Bill Benson: And from what you know  as you said a moment ago  she was taken to a different camp than your father.
Then my -- my - my fathers aunt  she -- she give it 10 - 20 pengas  and my salary  and this way we survived.
My mother had two sisters in Novi Sad  both of whose husbands died in labor camp a little bit later during the war  both of whom survived but their husbands didn't.
She had two sisters that survived the Holocaust  but her brother did not.
And talked to Eddy and thats how I found out that my parents had survived.
They survived the war in the Alps  but her husband was taken and killed.
It was many times this  during the German occupation that I survived.
Now  you said at some point this afternoon  th at your father actually survived the war.
I have one cousin in -- in Israel  who is my age  who -- who -- who has survived as [indecipherable] one of the ships like the Exodus and then became a male nurse.
I ended up in the worst schools later  but -- so I got a wonderful job.
Of the eight ones survived the Holocaust  two emigrated to the United States just before the war.
Some  many of them survived  but some unfortun ately made mistakes somewhere or they didnt know they stepped on a mine which were all hidden under the ground and they didnt have electronic equipment to detect it.
We didnt know -- she enda -- she survived the dr -- she wasnt drowned and we were in the water  I have no idea how long.
But there was name of my school friend who survived the war because she was in the group in ghetto that was in hiding.
And we walked  we walked  we marched every day  and less and less people survived.
Are you more comfortable being among people who did have to go through the war than those of us who never did.
One big synagogue which looked like a churc h. The main synagogue in the city of Rovno survived  and I visited Russia recently and I saw that synagogue.
She survived in Warsaw after the uprising she survived in there and came to her home town.
A. Guilt feelings that I'm the only one who survived and sometimes that is very difficult to justify.
But I And then and then you as do you assume that then if they werent killed during this kind of torture  then they th o-tho-those who survived were simply shot later?
And when she left me  she di d not think that I had survived  she thought that we had all gone to the gas chambers  her entire family and she really did not fight for her life at that point.
I have experience about the Communisms from my father  what I told you that he sent me to the school  and he taught me about the 1920 lot  about the World War trip  and how he survived.
And so I remember sa us getting finding [indecipherable] and there were five people; us  and my fathers sister was with us at that time  she is the one that survived  too.
And this uncle  my Uncle Bernard  who goes now by Dov and lives in Israel  he survived because he was prisoner of war.
And after the war  this was the first step and I survived  always thought if I ever survive  that's where I go first.
How some of these pe ople survived as long as they did  we could not understand.
And the Jewish people yo u know  there is a mother with the child  and two little every the Jewish people have children  a lot of children.
So the f -- go -- the army was a revelation to me  it was a revelation to th -- but I -- I survived it.
We were told that when we came to Flossenberg th at we were a sore lot  and we were  but we survived.
And she says  ﬁWe need y ou.ﬂ I says  ﬁYou dont need me  because Im finished with it.ﬂ She says  ﬁNo  now we have to look for Nazis.ﬂ I didnt want to do it  but anyways  I -- I -- I felt I shou -- I ow e her something  because I survived it.
So we are waiting to hear maybe someone of the men survived.
And so I I I read quite a few books  you know  and and in fact I just finished  some time ago  a book about a thousand Interview with Cesare Ugianskis February 1 8  2013 84 pages which is a diary of a Jewish lawyer that survived all these wars  and ended up in Israel and then depa and then become internationally known as a la -lawyer and so on.
One [indecipherable] the guy got lost in the wooded area someplace  shot down or whatever happened to him and he survived.
So nobody would know  but they were always caught  and many of the girls were taken before that time to camps and never survived.
Listen  he was proud of this -- the way I -- the way survived by myself and -- and I had freedom  you know  they -- they see what I had over there.
But since we had a relative who was putting a claim us and offered t-to come to them  we went with Malka Pollaczek  w ho also had a brother  and Alicia Farber  whose parents survived.
Straubing sticks in my memory because I ran into a German Jew and his daughter who had survived the war.
And as a matter of fact  if it wasnt for nature  I dont know if we would have survived.
I had the cousin who survived  was liberated by the Americans  and died two days later  because the food she was given  she couldnt take it any more.
But group -- the group of my peers  quite a few survived.
So there there are a few people  a handful of people who survived.
Interviewer : After the War  after the operation  what did he do  did he stay in Russia for a long time?
I would not have survived half of what he went through but he was very strong and he survived.
The -- This other person -- the Gentile survived the war which was a miracle  but he had somebody who got him out in somewhere.
Not survived - we didnt talk about survival and all that.
He was always grateful  you know  that we survived and that we were healthy and that  you know  things  when we came here  even though they struggled  you know  my dad could never earn much money  and he had to go and learn how to be an operator.
So this wa s the two experiences the direction run away and got killed two guys  and I survived.
Its  its unbearable and for some its so unbearable that  in effect  its  Ive heard one of my friends who survived four concentration camps including  as a matter of fact hes a Schindler  he was on Schindlers list for a while.
He was just sort of laying around feeling life was not worth living because he was sure he had no wife and no kids because there was no way he felt th at a woman and three babies could have survived.
But the youngest -- some of the cousins survived but the parents  no  no.
I took a look at my wife's family  where a father son  both of them  he survived as a matter of fact by being in Russia at the time.
And somehow we will find there some way to sleep.ﬂ But there were already some people in  which survived Auschwitz.
I am asking the question why I survived and the ot hers didnt  but I dont feel guilty.
I dreamed a lot about it  and many nights I would like to dream or to wake up to see it  but I survived.
Here we have a 1924 port rait of one of Morris' sisters  Rozia Rozen Bilauer  who survived in the USSR during the war.
Both because of the Lukower  all of these people who had survived  but also because in Brooklyn in the fifties when I was growing up there were survivors.
In Auschwitz  all my friends that survived  the few of them have it on their arm.
When I was there  I was sickand I didn't do too much.aL q O And...uh...if not for that Hungarian doctor  I wouldn't have survived th ere either.
I know that his mother and his sister survived and stayed there.
By that time a thousand or 1 200 Jews they left -- {survived} survived. {
He was in the Yugoslav USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0079 5army when the war started and so he -- he was -- he survived as a prisoner of war  he came back.
And when the Bielskis came  they didn't know that we are survived  nothing.
I guess I -- I just want to ask you whether -- you know  Ive talked to other people whove s -- y-you know  in -- in -- in doing other interviews with other pe ople whove survived -- Oh [indecipherable] -- there was one other woman whos e name I -- Ill have to look up -- Where is she living  in Boston?
And if something would happen to them I mean they could have never survived with out  I was their outside contact.
So out of the group that you came with duri ng the deportation the larger group how many survived?
Yes  we did  but those that survived were mostly leftists and those were people who would have been -- who would have been partisans.
I actually felt guilty for having survived when my grandmother didn't.
One was hiding under a pleated skirt by a lady in the train  so he survived.
It started because they studying together  but my friends at that point  most of them were people who survived the concentration camp .
So  you know  so people sa - peoples the -- the people survived  only could survive in account of people who helped them.
I really dont know how we survived  but I know we survived.
We toast each other with their wine and after the wedding ceremony  which only the two people  the previous couple witnessed and also her cousin -- which survived the war too  he witnessed so till today were the only ones witnessed our wedding.
that I was I was alive  and that I was recovering  and all that.
And he survived with the family  with [indecipherable] with kids  small kids.
And because she was naked then -- and she said she had so many children  thats why she -- she lost a lot of weight   and she survived.
No  not basically  just people who survived and if had two sisters survive  naturally they would stay t ogether or like my mother and I survived so we stayed together and we were just trying to get some food and medicine to try to get stronger so that somehow we could get  head back home to look for our families.
And I was very young  and they did some thing there  so it was very -- the doctor didnt want -- they didnt want me -- but I wanted a child  because when my father -- in 57 they brought my father  that survived Dachau.
And there I find my sister with her two children  and my mother  from Jonava  with a niece of mine -- the one who survived.
And the only reason I think I survived  because I was not that big  we knew they were going to ask to work.
Laughter) And they both survived  because the Germans just simply have forgotten about them.
My uncle survived but he met an ugly death in Poland afte r liberation.
And of course  the identity that my 11 father was a businessman was a shameful thing to say  shameful enough that you could have been arrested and sent to Siberia which the bad thing for one  which like it happened to some of the family  turned out to be good wishes for later  because it since they were sent to Siberia  they survived the war without a lot of these problems that the rest of us had to go through  those who survived.
They came home and they didn't live long because there is one who survived who is in Israel told us because I met him there to the trial he was the one who escaped  six  the poles came with hatchet and killed them.
They wanted many of the people who knew hi m from who also had survived Theresienstadt wanted to hang him up.
My father was dead in December  my brother survived him and my brot her died in March  three weeks before they could liberate his camp.
Now you can say this about all mothers  that their love carried through those who survived and they remembered their mother's legacy.
The teacher wanted to ask my older daughter who is now 44  is anybody in class who has a mother or father that is survived the Hitler regime that was from Poland or Germany or Romania  or Russia or whatever.
We liberated the people  you know  the Russians together...we went to uh uh .
But in terms of what happened to you  since you survived  do you look 87 at your life and say I just wish all of that didnt happen  or is there something about it that actually became important for you in who you became?
What happened that he survived and my father was a stronger man  was tall and he was stronger and he didnt survive.
No matter how resourceful a person had bee n  they had hidden  they still would not have survived  given that type of ---?
And this structure survived for several centuries  defending east ern territories of Poland against the invasions of Tartars and other armies which were trying to conquer Europe from east.
There were some children that by miracle survived  and still were in the Ghetto.
They were evacuated from  from Auschwitz and I know from her because I met her in London  she told me that they all survived.
>> Bill Benson: But some time relative close to before they were deported to Auschwitz.
Before we entered we had -- walking farther down the line we were told to strip naked and this on line always in five they looked us over again  anyone that had a birth mark or a scar from surgery or some women if they were middle age that survived the first selection and had some wrinkles on their body  were also taken out of this line.
The children are influenced by ha-having learned about what happened USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0003 41to the parents  naturally  but why should anybody be guilty that you survived?
Most of the peopl e who went through Auschwitz survived because they spent their they were there three  four days.
90% of the people who survived Auschwitz was there for four days or less.
Besides his wife and -- and kids  he lost his whole  entire family  no one else survived.
And and that the that their opportunity to make contact with someone who survived  must have had well  it only it isnt only must had a powerful effect  there were a lot of there were many there were manifestations of that effect.
And the fellow whose place he took  his name was Guy Ovneczech [ph] and he survived the camp.
He survived -- both he and one of my father's brothers  both survived as German prisoners of war.
Was only so on  so I with my sister  my cousin and my uncle was someplace else.
We had lot of love for each other  my father and I  and we kind of protect each other  and we were good for  for each other  that's the reason for we survived.
So you see  I was desperate after being liberated  knowing that no one had survived  he met a man that he knew from large ghetto.
By the time the war ended  he was making all sorts of efforts to try to find whether we survived the war and where we a where are we and obviously trying to bring us over.
Well I had nothing that survived  because when we were taken to Auschwitz  we were stripped naked and everything was taken away from us.
But her other sister went through Auschwitz an d survived  and the br other also survived and they ended up in Israel.
I don't remember -- >> Bill Benson: Were you with them during that time?
My mother survived the war and we both came to the United States  she passed away in the late 90s.
By the way  my sister Frieda survived and in Czechoslovakia th ey got out of Dorosig into Palestine.
The whole family that was with us in the ghetto was gone except my aunt  my mother's sister was still alive a nd one of her sons that was living in the same building with her in the big ghetto.
From my one and only aunt that came to the United States just before the war and pictures from her and making copies whatever I can get  anything and as many pieces of information I'm able to collect from the couple of surviving members of the family and it's basically genealogy but I am not going back very far because right now I'm not well  but I want to do this for those of my  members of my family who were killed and even those few who survived and I would like this  to give this for my children  who did not know their aunts  uncles  grandparents or cousins  so that they will know their family  at least through these pictures and whatever information I can gather and write down for them.
I just re member Perl Duri  with his friend because I went to visit him after the war with his mother survived.
We still have some that we know now that survived just like ourselves who were brought in from the outside.
But they left because that's why they not only survived but they also succeeded after the war in returning to normal life.
What was your feeling when you heard the war was over?
They were a bunch of people who survived from this to wn.
So  I defe rred to  to me  survivors were those who survived the camps.
Immediately once one of their people were arrested  we were going there  we freed them  you know  etcetera.
She was by the peasants house and then she let herself be caught as non-Jew to a slave labor and she survived in Austria because she got in touch with this Mundich.
That's a little bit of a hurt  but she survived and this  is the main...the main thing.
And she went to the partisans there  she reached them and she survived the war in the partisans.
Anyway...uh...I did get up to the south Eindhoven and there I found a Jewish community that had survived  went with an ambulance into Amsterdam.
And the -- and the two were cousin s  and they survived with us all the war.
At that age  I dont think that you think along these lines  but what is interesting  I think  and I often think about it  how I survived because later on I had to w itness hangings so on and so forth because Ive never really seen anybody hang  but this goes to late 44 early 45 in Stolp .
Having seen what you saw and survived what you saw  how do you ever grieve and mourn as people do after that?
But you see  these peop le who have been there already three or four years and survived  they were already the kapos.
He will help Mother  and he will -- he always -- he survived World War I  he will survive this war.
I have a memory from when I was a child of a friend of my fathers from Wolomin  a man who had been a worker of his in his lumberyard who he was in Auschwitz with and who had also survived and who remained a friend after the war.
Some...some of my friends said that I'm a miracle  that I survived what I survived.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 24 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: Okay.
He survived there he might be on his way home now.
And those that were deported  like for example my wife's parents were deported  they -- and she was born actually in Siberia because she -- her father was a doctor so he delivered her so there were -- they also survived.
If I survived the war  and I didnt go to Palestine  this makes me somebody -- I dont want to say a traitor  but some -- this is my biggest regret.
Or I did that and I was smart or I did this and thats why I survived.
>> Bill Benson: Tell us what happened to your parents and about your brother as well.
So I couldnt tell you that  but he said and then they said that its about 180 people survived.
By that time she got back the business -- she and her sister survived  so sh -- they got the -- back the business of her father.
And I dont even know if he survived or not because I was transferred to a different barrack and he stayed in the same barrack.
I don't know but this whole idea that one is guilty because one survived - it's not guilt - it is something else  and I don't think it's guilt at all.
But maybe my sister would have survived if I had grabbed her hand and take her to the other ghetto.
I had -- very possible -- according to what my grandmothe r told me  after the war I was youngest one  I was the little one who survived this.
Particularly when youre young  to have survived and then step into the normal life must have felt dull or ordinary.
And people who survived  even that there was not so closed  and I didnt think about th em  survived.
And another cousin of mine who survived the war was in the partisans  he was a bricklayer.
And thats how I survived til we left the woods in 44.
Did your sister also since she was a little bit older than you?
Nobody survived  none of the kids  except one of them -- one of the counselor -- Im -- Im not sure.
And it happened one time in Bialystok  I met a girl  sh-she was you ng  maybe she was only 16 years old or something  and she survived the Auschwitz  and she came to Bialystok.
Evacuated on Saturday  so many people were shot  so many people were killed  I didn't even want to ask who survived  who was killed  or what.
And  uh  like  uh  my company  uh  of--as I understand now--of approximately 216 men  there were only 29 of us survived.
>> Bill Benson: Nat  do you know when your family realized the  or learned the full magnitude of the Holocaust and what happened to your extended family?
And tha-that he he apologized for having slapped his face  because he had much respect for Lowenherz  and and Lowenherz survived.
I can't think of anybody else on the delegation who has survived.
It took a few days till the whole thing subsided but as I understand from people that survived  the gathering places was the main market place    in the center of Tarnow  was jammed with people that were either killed on the spot or taken to the railroad station and transported to Belsec concentration camp.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 3 for Irene and her five siblings.
What was about her was self preservation  I mean that's how she survived the war  I mean by having others killed.
And...uh...the morale was...was not bad because I...I survived on hope and I said  you know  alright I lived through this hour.
I should just say for the record here that in your video testimo ny and then in the audio interview that I did with your husband the other day he told the story of how you lost your younger brother and he was tricked and the whole thing with the phony resort and that after the war  as far as you knew that he had not survived.
But my Uncle Ludva survived only because he was not sent like my father -- whom he saw  by the way.
And she she knew everything what was going on because she was with them  but she survived.
I dont know where he survived but I think in Germany.
We lined up and our kids always laugh at this picture  and they make us -- we -- of course  we are a very close family  we always have been extremely close  and -- and because we survived the war together  and -- and the fact that we were never separated during the war  which is almost incredible.
He went to the neighbor and brought the child  so they survived.
Many of the 800 did of typhus during the summer any way  i.e.  they were selected to go to the gas chamber after contracting typhus  but the few who survived were helped by the fact that they didnt have to work outside in the heat of summer.
Another aunt of mine survived with her children in the mountains but she did not return.
But people told us - people from Starachowice who survived the war and Auschwitz  whom we met after the war - they said that the minute he came to Auschwitz   he was another man.
We lived in the ghetto  even before the ghetto  they lived there too.
In the meantime  she died in a car accident  so its really very special.
USHMM ARCHIVES RG-50.030*0078 5 have survived if they had not pulled me through that march.
>> Bill Benson: Did anyone survive besides you  Serena  and your aunt?
And I wonder if youve heard of that  and whether -- i -- i-its really -- you spoke earlier of your -- one of the hardest things was coming to terms with having survived.
>> Jacques Fein: The next step  I had some letters from the OSE  they wrote -- I had two uncles that survived.
They were so merciless that people that could survive Auschwitz must have been some  must have b een  had some  they had to do something  have some function  that they survived in Auschwitz.
>> Bill Benson: In fact  you said you survived because of your mother  luck  and the marshal.
While they were in the citadel with some packages  with whatever food and clothing or whatever was needed into the citadel and Rochelle w ho's the only one who survived told me that a German gave her milk through the bars every si ngle day.
It was a Jewish school  as I mentioned before  and that's the way it worked.
You know  I always think  was it the fact that I was so skinny that I survived?
We knew of one that was called Miranda and the situation was so bad that few people survived that camp.
We were in no labor camp  but I think we survived many And do you think that affected the choices you made later in life  that realization?
I mean  like the rabbi survived in having Yom Kippur that he was considered that he was our uh our messenger to the almighty.
And I was lucky enough -- and that is why I feel that my life had many miracles.
He arranged for 500 to escape  he was one of 50 who survived.
I did after the war sear ch  y -- my parents survived  in spite of Schliesser being sent to Auschwitz  and myself  my parents survived.
And because  I guess  I was a Jewish survivor  they accepted me.
What happened before the war  how we survived  and then what happened after the war.
And how he survived  he hid in the basement of the house.
All my uh five brother uh survived and they was in uh in Poland.
Did you have a personal need  after having survived  to tell others about it?
Thats thats how we survived  you know  is that the fact that he was able to get us on this cattle train  and thats only because He was in yeah.
Well  what kind of guilts do I live with?ﬂ And he said  ﬁWell  survivors guilts.ﬂ He says  ﬁYou -- you feel guilty that you survived and a lot of people didnt.ﬂ And when I hear that I -- I -- I get angry.
And there are the children of the survivors  so there are the majority of the people who survived.
Among other purposes  the Registry helps make it possible for survivors  family members  and others to find those who may have ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 5 survived.
He joined the he joined the the freedom fighters  and he he survived.
Did they have an understanding of the extent of what had been done in the name of Germany to the Jews of Europe?
They were -- they -- they -- the local German Jewish community -- like German Jews have been different in this country from eastern European Jewish immigrants  the -- I knew a few members of the German Jewish community -- I believe it was in Berlin  who had survived the Nazis by either living without ration cards -- they were unregistered  or they -- they may have been registered  but they were on reduced rations  depending on where they -- they were 25 percent Jewish or 75 percent Jewish  assuming they were not deported.
We survived the fire and we're still here.ﬂ So Aron said that the massacre they are still purging people but it is already mu ch quieter and it looks like they will leave some people.
What I said in it and the four of them survived.
After all  she was an el derly person  and she survived.
Even if you can intellectually understand the circumstances in which you survived.
An d we also had guard dogs because they couldn't stand it that ther e was youngsters that survived and they were  that are looking every day better.
His mother and sister were there with open arms  and we kissed each other  and USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0062 7 hugged each other  that we survived  and came not injured.
And even the chickens after awhile recognized that she's a weak person  and even this chickens pushed th at woman  Mrs. Shefne r  which came to the United States later  and survived here.. .survived the war also through a miracle  and...uh....she used to tell me about the chickens taking advantage on her.
They put me in a Russian camp  I was in prison in a Russian cam p. If the Russians had not given me cigarettes and food  I might not have survived  who knows.
One br other of his survived the Holocaust  because he was married to an Gentile.
Who most of the people from our town that I know  maybe 45 tell the people run away  most of them survived.
And those who survived  some of them have survived that they can see  still see the evil and the dark of what happened  and yet live a beautif ul life  without forgiving  without forgetting.
All the nephews and nieces and cousins  all of them were dead  all of them were killed  there was just this few of us  handful of us that survived.
He proposed  he would take his sister Tricia   who by the way survived  and I would take my sister Teela  and we four will escape if our parents don't want.
And then there ha ppened to be the story that the children were hidden and survived the war.
Carol: His one brother survived  the oldest brother  the oldest sibling  Moshe.
I'll be very honest with you  I never felt guilty that I survived and some didn' t. Because I didn't survive  I didn't do an ything to anybody to su rvive.
And this was she she was born in Berlin  and under circumstances that cannot be described any other than miraculous  survived  and ended up in sw in Sweden   in Stockholm .
And she made the death march  we knew that she di d  because her friends who survived told us.
And she s she found it  because in our congregation we have a Holocaust tour that survived the same country I did.
And somehow then  my mother did find out -- and of course she was in touch with her sister in Palestine  and she knew -- she found out  I as -- surely that she must have been i nvolved with those organizations  because how did she find out that my Aunt Kate was in Theres ienstadt  survived Theresienstadt  and somehow came to the United States  and she was just thrilled to have her sister here  because she was very close to that sister  as a child.
Daddy told me that my little brother was caught on the street  that maybe he survived.
After all  y-y-you -- if you didnt go through it yourself  then your parents who survived  told you all about it.
So that somehow  because then they started - people were beginning to be shifted  because I forgot how it was - I think Majowka 36 people used to work in the sawmill  or some thing  or the brick factory - I really dont know how it was all decided who worked where - but I do know that word came back to us that Hania and Krysia survived - no  the word was not ‚survived - that they were not shipped out.
Many of survivors of the Lodz ghetto feel that more people survived from Lodz ghetto than from any other ghetto.
You remember some of those stories among those hardships that people Well you know as I said a couple  a couple were in concentration camps.
And I do you remember a nything more about were they refugees  were they from mostly German Jews  or [indecipherable] Jews?
And from that point -- Tell me the name of your uncle who survived.
That's how we lived through until we survived from those eight days.
He survived the war in Much.. and came to New York afte r the war.
If she wouldnt come home  maybe she would survive  because from Kauna  some people survived.
And this is [indecipherable] [indecipherable] he survived in Soviet Union  but he died later  young  he had a tumor in his head  so -- but I saw him after the war  in Israel.
Then this man send him another letter  telling him if you know anybody else who survived  please let us know.
When I was going b ack to Koretz  I tried to take the gis -- gold as much as I can  and this survived me for anothe r two or three years  selling a piece of gold  buy bread  milk  whatever it is.
Was this a common thing that went on among the people that survived the war?
And not to find it out right away because they have to go out  they have to -- somehow they arranged with somebody  I dont know hi -- how  the girl survived.
A Lithuanian -- young Lithuanian Jew named Larry Lebetsky  whose family had survived the Nazis in Lithuania  through the help of -- actually I think it was a German military friend whom they had come to know during the German occupation of Lith-Lithuania.
We were scared but we believed  we some how believed that if we have work  well survived.
There was not in the history of Jews a situation like that  but nevertheless there were situations  hard situations  and the Jewish people always...the 16  the in the past  the end was so that we survived them and he hoped that omens of this type Hitler will also...his e nd will be the in the history of Jewish people  but nevertheless in describing the terrible situation of the Jews  the desperate situation  he collapsed and he couldn't conti nue to talk.
The other recreation was that -- that when I -- when they caught me with a bread  I-I was beaten up so badly that they broke  you know  a big spoon that y-you -- you are cooking for the whole army th -- and that I thought that they are going to kill me with it  but how I survived it is just really by miracle.ﬂ I said  ﬁIsn't that enough recreation for you?ﬂ And then the teacher  the other teacher came in and said  ﬁMrs.
See by then there were very few of them who survived still.
Thats story I heard after I come back to Poland from American army and I talked to people who survived the Warsaw uprising.
And the family that I had  uncles  could not take care of my sister and I because one of them survived Auschwitz .
Fortunately my mother survived  the photographs survived  and  of course  I survived.
I would say 99 percent were refugees  and again those were people either that were survived at a concentration camp or lived in hiding someplace  somewhere so somewhere.
We survived  but 6 million people didn't  including my whole family what consists close to a hundred people.
As far as I know  I am the only child who survived from th e State of Wuerttemberg in Southern Germany.
So she got the wife and daughter of of this man Mousekopf to be her assistants  and all all three survived the war.
Whether they have survived or how many of them have survived  I don't know but I do know of five thousand people marching out  very very 21 few have survived.
I found out after the war that there were three other Jewish children there  and so the four of us were there  but there were many other children there.
His wife  she was Jewish too  she survived also on Christian papers.
But my cousi n that survived  forever thankful to me for being able.
I cannot say anything  -- I can only say that they survived their way.
Interview with Fred Firnbacher September 16  2010 48 And the first time you went back  was one of your questions how many Jews might have survived and come back to Straubing ?
And being that she -- her name was Gerszono wicz and the other people were not related  but they also have the same name  and -- and they talked her into stay  so that we stay with her -- this 131 family  and my uncle came  and I came to look on my uncle  and I found out -- and I went to -- I wrote a letter to a Polish family which lived ne arby my uncle in the vill age and sure enough I got an answer from my uncle  I was su rprised that they survived  a nd I rushed to go to see them.
And his people went there  and pulled my great -aunts and grandmother out and brought them into this special building where they survived.
So they took us back to the ghetto but there was hardly a nything -- I don't even remember how we lived  how we survived the few weeks.
So I used to reach inside and take a piece of cheese  break off a piece and hold it in my hand  and I had him lay down in my arms like this and I fed him and he ate the piece of cheese  or he did that to me and this is how we survived.
In Russia  in the army  not in the army  they survived.
And I can't explain what kind of trouble what -- I don't know how we survived there.
And a bomb  I was with the typhus people  I got sick on typhus.
He got the medal from Yad Vashem by the way  he survived it all.
Because they wanted me to be gone and I have survived and if I am not what I am and show what I am  Im giving them a victory.
So you see  when  when people tell you that  uh  uh  surviving  those that survived  they are  they are a story  that's a different breed  and especially those who were in Auschwitz as long as I have been  as long as  you know  myself and the others  Kulka  Vrba.
And fortunately my mother survived  the photograph survived  and I survived.
Because that was I felt if I survived  thats the only way theyd be able to recognize me  because I changed so much.
Did you as a survivor have any thoughts on those experiences?
I th dont kn you know  thereve been theres been a lot written about people who were in Europe and and survived the Holocaust in Europe  or and what happened to them  people who were in the camps  or hidden  or so forth.
Had I known that no one is alive from my family  I probably wouldn't have fought to live.
We were just about  I think  the only family that survived.
She was married to my mothers brother  and she survived because she wasn't Jewish.
