Well  at that point  I spoke Russian  you know  and I spoke Hebrew  and I spoke Yiddish and you know  that was that was And so and English was gonna be added to that.
Im appearing in their amateur hour and winning a prize doing my krazotsky and singing Russian songs.
He wasnt a communist  he was in the party and because of that  that he was in Russia and spoke already Russian  he got a very big job in the Ministry.
Right  right  and who -- and who -- Do you think that that -- that may have been part of their understanding of -- Well  I think the Jewish people have alwa ys had a strong feeling about Civil Rights  and you know  being -- being an oppressed people fro m -- from way back  I mean  whether you go to Russia  and I mean  you know  the Russian -- the -- the Jewish people have been oppressed for -- for -- for -- for -- from -- from day one  actually.
We never had bad experience  for example  with French  Jewish  Russian  the same.
I I I took Russian  I spoke because when I was born my parents finished Russian schools before Lithuania was independent.
So they were afraid that something will happen  so they and and the Russian  a lot of Russian prisoners run away.
Some of the uh  Russian organized and controlled first army Polish troops moved in  recruit...recruited or drafted from eastern provinces of pre-war Poland  and trickling into town started coming back first Jewish refugees who were with escaped or got somehow saved by going to the Soviet Union.
And they grab me and escorted me  took me down to a nearby high school complex  and I was made -- German refugees from the eastern territories were arriving into Lodz because under the Soviet German pact  any German that lived wa -- east of Bug river  in the Russian occupied territory was free to leave with as much belonging as he wanted to.
He even found out one time that I have a potential cousin or uncle that's in the Russian Army  who was a general.
And the Russian officers came to check on the inventory  to take over as far as livestock is concerned and everything else  and they found us and inasmuch as th e officers.
I tried to stop one truck  another one  military Russian trucks passing by from Lublin to Zamush.
But thank God they had [indecipherable] they had a Russian Cossack who spoke French  and he was teaching French.
And he went on Monday evening to -- because the factory has to work  to give the keys away  because he understood that he will not any more be the 30 director  so -- and then they arrested him  and I saw him working in -- in the Russian embassy.
And this place is with a lot the Ukraine people that was in the forest  and they kill Russian people.
Then  we also ran to see the first Russian airplane that landed in that -- in our little town.
There were also some Russian PWs  worked in that Powder Tower.
Th ey didnt go to work like the Russian prisoners of war or the German civilians who could buy and so on. (
As a matter of fact  our language at home was Russian  not Jewish.
In the Russian cell that you -- A. We stayed back 3 weeks  and then they wanted to take us to Odessa to the Black Sea and go back to Mauthausen.
Then we went -- together we went to -- he was in the Russian army  a doctor in the Russian army  and we went and occupied east part of Germany.
She actually went to the Russian consul  and she applied  and she left  and and obviously the consul was Jewish.
By chance  sheer luck  we were together with the Russian prisoners who worked in the same place with us.
Warsaw was mainly under the Russian influence and Russian zone  so to speak.
But internationally  we had Fr-French  we had Russian  we had all kinds of partisans.
I couldn't get a job anywhere because wherever I went they wanted documents and -- or my original false documents said that I came from a little village near the Russian border and I kept up with it  and my name was Krystyna Maria Ka lnowska.
But my close friend was a French wa -- girl that had lost both her par -- parents in th e Holocaust and her uncle  who was Russian  Interview with Dorrit L. Ostberg July 29  2000 74and a multi-millionaire searched all over Europe for her and her sister and brought them over.
In Slonim  I was back with my family until the real war broke out between under the Russian occupation.
The Russian prisoners of war were treated abominantly by the Germans.
He had a relationship before the -- until the Bo lsheviks came and the Russian people occupied White Russia.
So we were on this side of the Oder; and we could see the Russian cannon on the other side of the Oder  you see.
Russian Jewish  I dont know  from Russian group  she came later.
ye you know  that two years before too  and also the two years during  you know  we had picked up quite a bit of Russian.
So  there was quite a congregation of people from that little town around and then there was one person who said I introduce you to the Russian commissar who is in charge of all the stores and his wife is taking care of children who have no homes and maybe somehow we can work something out that you ca n go to school  maybe find a job  and I had no place to go  I say okay I'll stay another day.
I have -- They speak Russian to me and I speak English to them.
When I hear Middle Eastern music and this includes Arabic  Israeli  any Middle Ea stern music or Russian music  something deep within me comes to life.
That was -- since I came from  I dont know where  wherever they had me come from in Poland  my Ukrainian was not perfect  my Russian was not absolutely perfect  but that was the excuse.
Even though it was a munitions factory  it was not bombed by American or Russian --?
I remember the first one of them demonstrated me one evening how to fire a rifle  and of course f-for a little kid thats -- I mean  I didnt fire it  I 17 couldnt even hold it  it was -- but -- and I learned to sing Russian songs  some of which I can still remember.
We had no idea what was really happening  except all of a sudden we noticed Russian uniforms around  and Russian tanks.
Before the war  it was a Polish city  belonged to Poland.
And this was the time where there was movement to get the Jews out of Poland.
We had family that came from Poland to Lithuania  my mother's cousins.
We stay ed in his house until the Russian front came.
So I had got my old school I.D. card that you just saw  because Latvian has the same diacritical marks as Czech  so to the 67 Russian this looked like Czech  to the American it probably looked like Czech  and to the -- I dont know what it looked like to the Czech  maybe he didnt have 20/20 vision.
The camp was in the middle of the Taiga  so it was guarded  but I don't remember any Russian or Soviet soldier with a machine gun or whatever standing over the people.
Right now  I see the regulations  ﬁ I said  ﬁfrom the Russian government.
So they came with a young Lithuania girl that knew how to write German.
I heard later on different stories of different people who were treated very badly by the Russian liberators  but I have not experienced that and I have not seen that.
But he was speaking a perfect French  a perfect English  a perfect German  a perfect Russian.
Sometime the Russian soldiers who was there in the station  you know  dont let us stay there.
When the Russian come in  first of all  they took away the rich and the and and this what and what they didnt like the ca ca zi-zi Zionist  and took them to Siberia.
They caught the SS - the main... Maybe the Russian later caught them.
But it didnt make any any difference  until later on  when the re when the relations were reestablishment between the Polish and the Russian government.
But otherwise they were  you know  hurry  hurry  hurry  and th ey would bring usually toward the end of the day  they would bring us in the pails  some kind of soup which was watery mixed vegetables  and ve ry hard  Russian bread  you know  like Yeah.
When finally the war was almost over  there was a terrible fighting between the German and the Russian armies .
And sure this was first what liberated by the Russian Army.
I adapt myself to the problems  even when the war started right away and we ran and...uh...we tried to escape  went...went with the Russian army.
Again  Im use to answering Yiddish  and my parents would speak Polish  some Russian because the town we came from was it was Poland and it was White Russia  and then it was Poland again.
But the Russian people  we had to stay away from ‚em.
My father come back fr om the prison -- mean the farm prison  and come back to Warsaw  and start working aw -- eight -- for example  propa -- he was about 20 years old  working for state like Marines  on Vistula ri ver  because during this time  if you has -- are 18 ye -- or -- year -- years old  you cannot create a good education  because was very tough during the sn -- Russian occupation.
I s-saw where -- where -- the park where we left  I didnt see the -- by the way  the house we owned was taken down   and they built big blocks of -- of apartment houses  Russian st yle drab  and -- and ugly  and square.
I think it was...the offensive  the Russian offensive was already a long time on.
We crossed and we we found the Russian sentry standing sleeping so we woke him up but and he told us where the headquarters are.
So  were your parents more assimilated  in in that they spoke Polish and Russian  or Absolutely not.
There were people around us  Polish  Russian speaking  and they signed like an affidavit to become Russian citizens and work in Russia.
He was he must be a white Russian like we used to say [indecipherable] anti-Semitic  and later on  I f I feel sorry  I mean  it was a captain  and I thought always that he must be Jewish  because he was all the time so nice to me.
Oh  I got a job by the Russian  they pa explaining for the girls that went to to the Germans from Russia  to tell them to tell me what they did and everything.
>> Bill Benson: Tell us about arriving in Auschwitz if you can.
And then there is my mother worked at that pl ace  and I think there was sometimes some Russian food that you could get  I think.
>> Susan Snyder: You said that you became aware of the brutality of the Germans beca use you witnessed the Russian POW s. >> Rae Goldfarb: Yes.
Those 10000 people were taken to the called the Ninth fort in ghetto  and uh  previously Russian prisoners had dug trenches  and they all  everything was prepared  was done a master plan  how to exterminate the 10 000 Jews.
But Slovakia wasnt involved at that at that Slovakia was involved later on  in 39  and th e there it has even had even the name  the the Slovak army  the Slovak  it was so cold [indecipherable] divizie   the first divis division who they sent  certain I dont cannot tell you exactly how many thousand people they sent to help to win the war with Hitler against the German  against the Russian.
And so  within hours I had orders  I think they were signed by General Bradley  to go into the Russian zone  to the libera to Theresienstadt  to carry out the instructions of the theater commander  that was Eisenhower  that f were my orders.
I would have occasion maybe to hear Russian spoken in the house while my mother may be speaking to some body Russian.
And we went into one of the houses that the daughter was going out with the commandant  with the main guy  with the Russian.
One of the Russian soldiers took Margaret's father along to help him carry them in a-- in a sack or something.
Everyone had to take in Russian soldiers because Libau was a majo r base for the Russians  and Libau had three ports that never froze in the winters and thats why you had also a very big naval port in Libau where part of the Russian fleet was stationed.
I was not considered a Russian  and the for...the Belgium Foreign Ministry gave me a temporary passport good for one year so I could put my visa on it  and I had to go to Antwerp to the American Consulate and I had to go to Brussels to the Foreign Ministry to get this called laissez-passe which I still have  to get my visa  but I couldn't get passageway because the American troops were st ill coming back.
It was like a group around maybe hundred  maybe 150 soldiers  this SS  and they have not only SS  they have additional the Russian -- no Russian  this was Ukrainian people.
And they take us over... Seems like between the Russian Army and the American Army  there was a no man's land.
There was a wo-woman with me there  ya -- a young woman  very pretty  she had just a baby  and the Russian come and -- the [indecipherable] drunk Russian comes in at night and wants to rape her.
One day the Russian army decide that al l officers got to know how to dance  but dancing to ge to Germany  in Germany everybody is kultura.
So I was hoping both these two had survived  but u-unfortunately no matter how much I tried  I did not I did not find my sist er  but I  after awhile  investigating and chasing around  I found out that my brot her  my older brother was captured in the Russian prison  survived and he is waiting for me in Czechoslovakia   Chust.
And when the war broke out  it took three days and three nights that the German were not able to step in in the villages  in Kovno and in other villages  because the fronts were going on fightings between the Russian Army and the German Army.
So I shouted down into the basement for Margaret's father to come up  because he had that paper that that Ru ssian colonel had -- had given him  in Russian.
The levels were occupied by different  they were Russian prisoners  French prisone rs  and we were on the top and there was a rail going up and one of the privileged prisoners controlled the brakes  that is he let the full lorries go down to the valley and brought an empty one up and we had to fill each lorry with  what  12 lorries a day or we would get no food  and we -- the rail for the lorries then from the brake station were then two of the different niches where the prisoners worked  so I had this and another one had this and so on.
We were not with our group when the front shifted and the Russian armies were pushing the Germans back.
And the Russian guys Interview with Chasten Bowen April 26  2013 41 I used to talk to some of the Russians  theyd speak a little bit of English  and one of them used to tell me all the time that America would never survive because we produced so many airplanes and stuff lik e that  and we would financially and everything  fold after the war  that we couldnt stand all that production  and stuff like that.
And I recall that they had put like -- like wires on the windows so that the soldiers -- the Russian soldiers couldnt get at the women.
So they shipped all of us out  which was quite a number of people  to the East ern part of Poland--I know it was early fall or late summer--to dig ditches in th e form of a \ V\ ... they were qu ite big  to prevent the Russian tanks from coming across.
And Id gotten  of course  I was at the time this the main job of that particular office really  was handling the Russian refugees that were coming out by about 20 or 30 000 a year.
They call us in Russian the runner ise -- the runner ups  the runners.
After the war  he was in the Russian army and then he went into the Polish army.
The first person we saw on the uh on the May the 11th  when it was about 10 o clock in the morning  there came a couple of Russian soldiers  I didn't know that one of them was Magor  they come on the horses without the saddle  the rifle w ith a string  they didn't look to me like a sol  soldiers  they looked to me like a bunch of uh I don't know  running away soldiers.
One of the unfortunate things that happened there was that one of the Russian bombs hit the building that we were in and probably fifteen or so of us were killed.
Take one card out and swap them all over [DL] You mean the Germans on the Russian front if they were waiting for ammunition... [AG] Yeah  yeah we used to swap them over.
They were with the Russian partisans  and they were with the Bielskis Brigade.
I wasnt -- I was mad when they took away the wall from Germany  you know  they have a dividing wall with the Russian  put up a wall  East Germany.
But somebody told us that its already free  they already -- the Russian people  the Russian soldiers came in already.
I dont think its my imagination  I think the city changed and it -- under the Russian occupation  it did change.
My fathers name was Boris or Robert -- Boris  anyway  in Russian it was Boris.
Q. Did the pupils or teachers know that you were Jewish?
Like my husbands name  Gersh -- Greesha -- ge -- in Russian calls Greesha.
It's uh it's the way how in th eir  in the Russian passports you are being uh uh indicate your nationality.
But Berlin by itself  found itself within the Russian occupational zone  which means Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 130 that in order to get out from Berlin is not to get out of Berlin  I had to get out from the whole zone  to cross through hundred few hundred kilometers.
He got also married to a not Jewish Š to a Jewish girl  a Jewish girl.
We're just like you.ﬂ In Russian \ Vi tozje takoje\  which means we are also lik e that.
The Russian colonel who turned out to be a medical doctor  spoke a good German at that time  he said  look  youre free.
When the Russians came  no one to teach the records and people see what  we know him and he was a good soldier and he knows Russian language good and he begin to teach the government and he take money for this.
There was a guard watching the area where the buildings where we were actually housed  Russian stayed there and people who worked for them.
Gens had a notion because in 1943 when we came to Wilno in March  then April  May  June  the Germans had big defeats on the Russian Front already and Gens had a thought that if the resistors do not bring in the destruction of the ghetto  the people might survive.
We...I spoke very fluently Russian  my friend Kronzon spoke very fluent; and we told them everything. \
I saw those little dots coming closer and closer and they were two Russian soldiers.
So  in last year  I knew out -- you know  the Russian rifle -- how to take apart and clean a rifle and all that.
They spoke Polis h and Yiddish  and and also some Russian  because at that one point  the Russians were there  and that during the first World War  the Germans were in were in Warsaw .
They thought that she was a spy  a Russian spy in Germany so they wanted to kill her.
As the front lines started to move forward  the Russian armies kind of joined up with some of the partisans.
And they w ouldnt say I am Polish or Im Lithuanian or Im Russian.
And I remember one day where the  where this farm was being bombarded by russian fighter planes and that was like a great  great thing.
You know  coming out of the concentration camps  coming out of that place  that Russian camp  and everything  and he brought me presents  and -- and he took me to pl aces  but I could not speak USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0053 17Jewish  and I could not speak any other language with him.
But then  since Czechoslovakia had -- was supposed to become independent and the Russian a-and the American troops were supposed to be withdrawn  by October the Russians were trying to round up their nationals and ship them back and my illness was -- had regr essed far enough that it was no longer an excuse and we realized that we would be in trouble if we didnt want to go back to Latvia again.
But he did speak Russian fluently  and he might have learned e nough Lithuanian to get by  for all I know  I just never heard him speak it.
And so this woman used to get couple of those Russian workers and go into the fields and there [indecipherable] around  and she would say w-we can g glean your fields.
We try to stop some of the Russian trucks so they can maybe pick us up so we can go with them east to Russian.
And  he was  he was a nice Polish ma n  with Polish looks  with Polish speak  speech  I mean  you couldn't mistake him for anything else.
But the Russians were really  really treated bad by that time  the Russian POWs.
So with the help of the packages which I sent him regularly for many y ears  he subsequently is a very capable man  spoke Lithuanian fluently  spoke Russian fluently  spoke Yiddish fluently  all these things which I couldnt do  he was able to do very well.
And I came to him once  he was sitting he was the manager of the whole place  and I said to him [speaks foreign language here] because in Russian its kerosene  too  and I made mistake  in Polish we say nafta   in Russian so he said [speaks foreign language] Well  and he told me that I cannot give it to you.
The Russian  so-called  you know  the -- the Russian  th-the trials and the -- I mean  this was -- now youre finding out that Stalin was as big a murderer as Hitler  you see.
By the way  all our neighbors  most of the community from town  were Russian.
And I said something  not connecting  or referring to -- to his English  and -- because it was obviously with a Russian accent  and I can detect it immediately.
They they was afraid  even the Jews  but they didnt know if th we are Russian Jews  so move on to the Russian side  or so they were Interview with Paul Jonas May 3  2013 35 What how did life change for your family?
But then comes the Russian war  the invasion that -- to us.
Oh  this is this is a a was graduation from the fir first case grade the first grade  and the Russian language  the mathematics  history  and I all the grades were were very good. [
I saw Russian tanks comi ng up to the city  waving to us and we asked them how are you.
The prisoners -- the Russian Army did not fight very much.
And he got in the in the Russian prison camp  he was no more first of all  he came half dead home  after a lot of years  he never was a communist again.
So my parents spoke Yiddish here and there  mostly Polish though.
We had oth-other undefe und un under un u-u-under our feet Germans and Russian  are mixed  th because the the the the the the fight was so intense and the artillery of the Russian was giving fire [indecipherable] and bombs that i-it was a you couldnt see anything  like rain before you.
We all -- before we heard already the Germans leaving and the shooting of the big guns came nearer and nearer till the Ger-- Russian came  so then we were safe.
It was...the Russian Tiger is is unbelievable because the only thing you have over there is trees and was not a house.
The -- the Russian  which is why -- they went to a different woods.
And you were forced to go to Russian school once the Russians were in  right?
If I dont go to work and nothing happened to my family I would be a deserter  because I was sort of mobilized alrea dy by the Russian army to be on the railroad  and then they will kill me as a deserter  the Russian government.
And I said to sar -- to my sister  I says -- and then I even slept with her in the same bed because I was afraid some of these Russian prisoners were going to  you know  rape her or do something.
What we first witnessed wa s a few Polish Jews who came right after the  the Russian Army  Soviet Army.
So the period of the Russian occupation was a relatively safe period for your family?
My parents spoke Yiddish amongst themselves a nd the whole family spoke Yiddish.
But I learn Russian by myself  before I went to Belarus   because I know eastern Europe  theyre all speaking Russian  so what I need to learn Polish?
Because they figured you're more efficient and you're more good the camp will work  that they would stay a chance not to go to the Russian front.
When the war was over the Russian told us if we want to go back to Poland   we can go.
So  there was a Russian guy also  a prisoner of war  and that guy  he understood that kind of work.
But you no  no Jews  no Jews  no Jews.ﬂ Even the Russian soldier.
Im talking about time that it was still under regime of the Russian army.
And naturally they did whatever th ey want  and when they were going over -- they were in Lodz  and they saw a German plane flying overboard  a Russian soldier picked up his rifle and shot in the air  he dont know what he is doing  what he shot  and this you can imagine.
Some young guys thought to go to German girls  whatever  and the Russian military police used to  at night  searching for deserters.
So  b-before he answered me about the information  he said  through this interpreter  why are the Americans killing Russian soldiers?
We really dressed back -- dressed back in army uniforms of the Russian Army  so this sort of did not have them with us  but we got them.
So when y ou were in the Polish army  you were in Russia?
They and the judge  I dont Interview with Go ldie Buch Jonas May 5  2013 48know if it was Jewish  it was a Russian Je w or some  I dont know  he listened to their story and they said they had never worked on Yom Kippur  and even if they died  they would never work on Yom Kipp ur.
Yo-You had said before that on the train  the Russian guards on the train were nicer than the Russians that you met in Russia.
So he told the Russian people coming back from Russia  maybe one of his brothers will survive.
Now  two days after the SS had left the Russian soldie rs started to march in  but they never really liberated us.
I didnt care about it because I spoke Russian and it was my language [indecipherable].
Polish Ukrainian became Soviet Ukrainian and Polish Jews from there were -- and Poles  not just Polish Jews --.
So once Soviet Union was attacked  vast spaces became killing grounds  where nobody counted for anything  I mean they could murder Russian civilians  Ukranian civilians and was the start of the extermination of the Jews.
We have French -- not English -- French and Russian and Yugoslav.
The Russian policy doesn't mean anything but their policy 25 was that all the people from Rovno  to take to a strange front  to the opposite  not to...not...to strange territory  and I wind up with a division what ninety percent were Ukraine  from Rovno  from   which the biggest nightmare for me.
I never can do  and the Russian came and I could be Russian.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0039 3 I didnt have to  I knew it right away  because they were taken already that time  in big ma-masses  to -- to Auschwitz  especially the older people  are going right away and the younger people were partly in -- in army camp  with the Slovak army  or -- or just hiding when -- on -- in the partisans  you know  the Russian underground.
Did you speak to any Lithuanian people while you were there?
But it was the Russian army that was chasing the German Army.
And he lived in Amsterdam and they were a very  very religious -- his father was the founder of the Russian shul -- Russian synagogue in Amsterdam and very  very Orthodox.
I don't want to spend too much time on this  but my brothers ended up on the Russian front.
And he did a degree in glass technology which is an unusual subject  but before he finished his studies in 1946 we brought his parents over to England becaus e they had  in fact  they lived in Krakoff and as the Germans marched in they marched out towards the Russian si de and eventually the Russians sent them right deep into Russia and although they had an awful war  there were no worse off than of the Russians because nobody had any food  so th ey were discriminated against where they were and they came back to Krakoff right after th e war  and then we brought them over to England and they always said they had been the happiest years of their lives.
And I know I I speak with Russian  then I knew.
So thi by the time and it was I even met in January  or in February  two Russian guys who escaped from a concentration camp in Poland.
Now  they told everybody so how many yeah  they was bringing German Jews from Germany also  and from Denmark .
I dont mind if you kill all the Russian Jews  but the German Jews are good people  they work  theyre qualified  I want to keep them.
He sent a letter to us and he stay on the Russian side of occupied Poland  in Lvov  in some places in that -- that were taken by Soviet Union.
And there we were with the supposed to be with the Russian girls  and lets see  what else?
They were beggi ng army they should take them because they felt that the Russian s were right there behind them.
And she was speaking good Polish or good Russian so we decided to send her out  to the closest chimney  so out to the edge of the forest and you could see the smoke coming through the chimney  so that means  they were over there.
Because I had I had the Russian occupation I mea n  the German occupational marks  which belong to the on the Russian border on the the the Russian zone  not the the the British and the American zone had different different marks  you know.
One day  as we were going home from work towards the evening  Russian soldiers came across us.
So a representative of the Soviet POWs  Ukrainian officer  when he heard that I spoke Polish  for a minute we attempted to converse in Polish.
There was a lot of Russian soldiers in that area  and he took us to... uh...Danzig  and left me at the hospital and she told me  \ Tell them you are deaf and dumb and you can't... and you can't and you don't understand a word they're saying.
The Russians told them  either you take Russian citizenship  or we send you back to gulag.
There was the civil workers  the Ost42 workers from east  from east  from Poland  from Ukraine  from Russian  and sometimes there was even the prisoners from the war  from American prisoners  English prisoners  Australian prisoners.
So during the Russian occupation  economic -- economically  it was disastrous.
But later  you see  go out in the streets  and you saw those Russian soldiers  and -- you know  I -- like I mentioned  I was raised and I had none -- much sympathy for Russians.
First of all  th-the Russian prisoners were not treated very friendly by the Russians  because Stalins Stalins view was that the Russian s should never fell in a prisoner life  I mean  he should give his life for the country.
So  we got the gas  and I didnt have more to stay and ask about [speaks Russian] in Russian [speaks Russian].
Agnes Adachi 39 October 14  1995 A. Anyhow  I go into this one place and there is two Russian officers sitting and I felt awful and frightened and the one said are you Rumanian and I said yes  of course I knew that I don't speak Rumanian and I said I'm just coming home.
We were caught at one point we thought we were in the Russian -- the American zone  we ended up in the British zone  they sent us back to the Russian zone and eventually went through the alp passes  the Alpian passes into Italy.
I had a young Russian boy working with me  I would duck behind the machine.
And in the town where she lived right across her apartment kind of faced this village square but to the right  down the road  was where the Russian soldiers were housed and I recall that she would sometimes send me there with things to– To trade or what?
When you were fighting the Germans  were you fighting as a Jew  or were you Interview with Noah Roitman April 8  1999 82fighting as a Russian soldier?
And he was a German  but he also was a Polish guy  because he spoke German and Polish.
Before the war  it was a Polish city  belonged to Poland.
All right  so September 17 Interview with Sabi na Berggren January 30  2015 43 Seventeen  it I remember being take n to the window  and it was pouring rain when the so Russian soldiers were coming in.
But when ŠŠ the first sector was the Russian  when you pass by Russian  the Russian soldiers saw the   the train  to look whose there  don't say anythi ng.
My my I think it was second my when army Russian army was coming closer and closer  therefore all the concentration camp  they is trying to go to west.
She came to one house of children  in Russian and she found her child.
Apparently during the war he escape to Russia  and he came back.
I have a question about just after Lodz was liberated in 1945  and also in Germany at the displaced persons camps  what was it like meeting more children  some of whom had different kinds of experiences  speaking Russian  Polish  Yiddish?
We di d know Russian  some Polish and I really don't know how formal it was.
At that stage I didn't care  and one morning I looked down from the fourth floor and there was the Russian army  and being that I speak other languages  some Czech  some Yiddish...there was a Jewish officer in the Russian army.
So there were Russian forced laborers  who were followers of Vlasov in this camp.
So being that they used to be called by the Russian name of militia or the German police were organized -- the head of the police was a German.
If youre a Polish citizen and you want to go -- instead to be in the Russian army  you could go to the Polish army.
In this time  we got afraid to come to these same...to these same Ukraine people to be...and we was right looking for the Russian partisan.
He was upset  he had his whole family  he was a Russian.
She spoke Lithuanian  then she learned German  but well  she knew some Russian.
So I didnt speak Yiddish at that time  I spoke German and these people spoke Yiddish  so you had  Yiddish is a turned around German.
While a in addition  th ey learned Polish  and knew Polish  but Yiddish was the major language.
speaks Russian] [Speaks Russian] Interview with Maria Pawulska Rasiej May 8  2013 84 Yeah  and so they were arrested  they were parasite  because they were living oh  first they sold their things  and then they would buy from some Right.
So they took me -- This is the -- the Russian army?
This was Germans  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0080 90and the -- and the Russian  the [indeciphera ble].
Finally  we were permitted to talk to Russian soldiers because the Russians had established bases in Latvia already in September  October 1939 as a result of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact   but we were not permitted to talk to Russians.
And he came back and he said  \ I don't know whether I'm ordered back to the Russian headquarters  but I don't know if I am going as a guest or as a prisoner.\
Interview with Go ldie Buch Jonas May 5  2013 33 Russian and Jewish.
We had trained enough Russian soldiers who were able to rebuilt weapons.
So when when they came to the [indecipherable] waterfall  then they the Russian  Interview with Stanis awa Tobis January 28  2015 111whoever was in charge of that group  sa id that they have to go down on the waterfall.
And in the spring of '44  toward May '44  start the Russian  recall the Russian front was uh broken  the Russian victories against the Germans.
Then when 4 they saw the Russian...the Russian are coming  th ey took us from Birkenau to Auschwitz.
But uh many Jews went on  went out from the city to reach the russian border to flee from the Germans but the Russians had uh had closed the border.
And do you remember what it was lik e seeing the first Soviet soldier?
These were all Jews that were trying to... Jew...Jewish...mostly...probably a lot of Jewish  mostly Russian and a lot of Jewish people were running away  and I was with the uh uh Frieda Klatter.
I took about– We went through th at strategy twice  in 1939 but it lasted two days because soon we hear on the radio that the Russian army cr oss the border and are coming to liberate us  we werent scared anymore  because the Germans we re still 150 kilometers from us.
And they got -- they got Russian prisoners of war  too.
Then we heard  we heard  after a long time  we heard this big \ Ru ssian  Russian  Russian.\
Yes  because he was born under the Russian system  so he spoke Russian  Polish and Yiddish.
All of a sudden a young Russian officer wearing a short leather coat and I remember it so well like it happened yesterday  with a machine-gun strung around his waist  walked in  looked at us and a seasoned Army veteran broke out in tears and started crying.
And the next night we met two Russian soldiers  not partisan this time  and we spoke to them.
What can you tell us about that period of time when you were under the Russian occupation ?
And uh  the Lithuanian guards  the Lithuanian part--the Lithuanian partisans  Lithuanian soldiers  machine gunned them and then covered them up with tractors with earth  and earth had moved for three days  with the tractors and run over them to squeeze out the last breath  and when uh the front came closer   and start undigging them  and the same prisoner  pl-uh Russian and Jewish prisoners were still there  they found laying there  mothers with children wrapped around together  and they died together in the common grave.
When the Russians came to Lithuania after some agreement was made between Russian  USSR and Germany  the Red Army came to Lithuania  and nobody realized what was happening.
And then we went to actual German this was I dont know that was British zone or American zone.
Im working for a amer for a Russian lawyer  who heads an American affidavit committee for people for Russian refugees not refugees  for Russian how should I say it  call it?
In the morning came  it was called in Russian  a Stiab.
But as soon as we came to this country  my parents did not want to hear a word of German so I spoke English quickly and they learned to speak English or they spoke Yiddish but they didnt speak German.
This was the time when the front was nearing  of course  because we were moved to Auschwitz from the ghetto to  at the time when the Russian fo rces were already close to Warsaw  but the front didnt move until later on in the fall  a nd for this reason  you know  we remained in Auschwitz.
I heard them uh the noise of uh branches until finally somebody told me from behind  hands up    and...in Russian  and went through my pockets.
And in s -- late May  they -- Russian planes dropped off military -- military what you call it?
So she took me to there was a a Russian truck  military truck.
This was til nowadays  this burning tank on the side of a street  so it must be the Russian must be very near  then.
We we spoke Polish because we did go to Polish schools.
And the Russian Cossacks made some anti-Semitic riots and other things  a nd they just decided to come to Uszhorod  which was Russian -- the Russians couldnt pass the Carpathian -- pass the mountains  so they came to start a living -- 2 Where did he come from?
And all the time my husband kept the letter with him in his...uh... But when we are within one borderline and the Russian were...were hitting us  terribly shaking  and I saw they are taking all the written things of they take away And then Avraham saw it . . .
He's a hero  Russian hero...he lives...I don't know if the lives now.
Like  lot of these American people -- I remember the Jewish friends  the dentist  for instance  these people were -- th-that time  they were all Russian sympathizers.
No  was a mixture Russian -- in fact it was more Russian than Jewish people.
There was a Russian woman who worked with the occupation forces in Germany and there was a major  air force major who taught Polish pilots.
Yeah  because I used to go to Russian school all that time.
I mean the Russian shock troops were absolutely illiterate  from the Far East  looking very much like Mongols.
They led us all we were close to the border  but not at the border  and I dont remember whether Russian or Germans helped us through the barbed wire.
So we went another maybe 20  30 miles and we got to the Russian border.
So when the Russians took over  they made a more wide  you know  on the Mm-hm  a wider [indecipherable] the Russian a Russian standard.
And I wrote to them and I warranted about him  that hes not one of the Russian serv ices and he got a job in agronomy.
He was a soldier in the Russian army and they lived in Siberia first  in Russia  then when he died  they moved to China.
So he lived in the eastern part of Poland that had been part of the Russian Empire?
During the Russian occupation  they did not take us out anyplace.
So I went back and we stayed together as much as we could and also I was told to be very careful because with the British and the French and the Russian and the Hungarians  I can be any day taken to a prison and asked questions.
Of course I later learned the reason that uh she had been uh kept at the police headquarters was that uh my father had uh uh a lot of uh being that he was wealthy and uh had connections with the leading uh members of the community  so even after the ghetto was organized  he was able to uh obtain through uh uh payment a document from the uh uh mayor of the town in Zwolen and the uh German commissar  the German uh governor of the town  a special document for uh as a merchant and uh supplier of uh the uh uh shoes to the German army and whatever  so he he obtained uh a passport uh so to speak  a uh it was which a document with which he was able to travel and uh the idea was that uh after uh the war broke out and the  Poland was divided to the German Russian sphere of influence  uh his uh he owned two trucks that were confiscated so uh we couldn't get no means of escape but uh he was still dreaming of the  to get us uh out somehow uh with money that he still had and influence.
Poles were looked a little bit down because the Russian s said that they came to liberate us from the Polish yoke or whatever.
My grandparents -- my father's parents and many of his sisters and brothers  except one  they lived in Poland.
So they spok e Polish  my mother spoke German and my father  of course  spoke Hebrew and Latvian and that.
>> David Bayer: Well  there used to be a big military camp the Germans had called ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 11 Foehrenwald.
Interview with Stanley Kiersnowski June 20  2014 46 Polish people  the rus well  there was one Jewish NKVD officer  a Polish communist and two Russian soldiers.
But they were not in the communist -- they were not in the Russian zone.
So then  they made a special battalion and other Russians started to come  because actually and when the uprising came in August 1944 to Banska Bystrica   the Russian sent some Russian people to help for alph uprising.
I wrote it -- you know  I wrote it in Yiddish and I had that in book in Yiddish.
It was no mans land between the Russian front and the German front.
And Anita Frank 79 [Date not labeled] Page 79 whereas for most Americans they did not know Russian history as much nor did they understand the horrors  particularly what Leningrad went through.
Two days later we were liberated  and um  I think it was a Russian general that came in.
So I  again  with the Russian language  come to him  a nd its a major  military major  tanks  big tanks.
But he was Polish  he spoke Polish  he identified with the Polish state.
We didnt want to go into the Russian zone  so we went to the England zone  because from Poland firs t is the Russian zone.
And I went to -- from there we went to Budapest.
So So he told you to so the Russian officer Interview with Moshe Kraus November 30  2014 16 Yeah.
There were two Russian and they were asking me questions and she gives me that look and I told her she was Šfor her brothers 25 th anniversary three weeks ago and I told her about it.
There was this [indecipherable] or whatever theyre called [indecipherable] he he made a taxi  and he drove the Russian  he went there.
Actually  it was a ru -- it was a Russian nagant  n-a-g-a-n-t  but it was built like an American western six shooter.
And he went back into the Russian zone  where he wa -- they gave him a wonderful life  anyway  I dont know why he ever wanted to leave.
And thats the first premonition you have -- That is pre-premonition that theres some -- and then they introduced -- no  they introduced Soviet bases  basi  bases for Russian soldiers.
She couldn't accept the fact that after what she went through a Russian soldier will rape her and then what.
Did not want to take their passports so they were sent to Siberia.
There were ditches which they filled the ditches  this was near the Russian border  so there were ditches made  anti-ta nk ditches.
So some people somehow  I dont know how  met some Russian who would say well  why dont you give like in case of our friends  with whom he still lives in Interview with Maria Pawulska Rasiej May 8  2013 69Warsaw  I visit him.
Now  did you go to school a-at your same Jewish school  or did you -- It was the same Jewish school  but different program.
It star t and came the Russian and begin the war and stopped my education.
And very shortly after I would not say that I myself as a ch ild suffered much under Russian occupation.
And for example  in the sovkhoz   I never saw u Russian soldier.
So were you with Orlovsky until -- Til the -- -- til the Russian army came?
And we were not the only ones  there were many Jewish people that wanted to get out of Poland and wanted to  you know  sort of run towards Germany or even Italy  wherever they were able to go and with the hope that from there  they will come to the United States or go to Palestine or go to  you know  different countries.
As...uh...as we were in the ghetto...you know  the ghetto had own police department  fire department  had a Jewish community committee and...uh...they had an order for...the Germans also wanted the ghetto...ghetto to...to exist beca use the hierarchy for the Germans didn't want to go to the Russian front.
They spoke Yiddish and my father was probably Russian and Yiddish.
Actually  Russian became my first language because while I was a 2 -year -old or 3 -year -old kid in Poland  I know my parents -- even though they knew Polish but they talked with each other in Yiddish  a Jewish lang uage .
And but these two sisters  they been in orphanage  and my mother  when we been going  we we took it th-that arba   you know  the what we travel in in Uzbekistan   they have a big wheel  and the [speaks foreign language] How do you say it in Russian?
When his family arrived  he brought two Russian girls from Moscow  th e head bookkeeper and the head cashier.
He comes to G  and he said  in Russian  my name in Russian is .
And we then that was very interes ting  because we stood a long time at the border between East and West Germany  and there were the Russian soldiers with their little red stars.
A lady came out  old  you know  you [indecipherable] up everything with [indecipherable] she was afraid that the Russian were coming  do something to her.
So then tol they told me to take a group of my friends and go and see the there is a report that some communists  or maybe even Russian soldiers  straggling soldiers are in a big building  Meistas factory  or a a b a building  that they might be hiding there.
Where was one -- one upriding Russian citizen  or something  thats -- you know  its  ﬁWhat the hell are you doing here?ﬂ Nothing.
I dont know why it did not happen  but it was on the agenda in in in Germany   before we took Berlin  because the Russian wanted to press so hard  kill how many Russians and Germans together  just to be the first in Berlin.
The next morning we went down and we saw thousands of Russian soldiers  without without officers  without...not organized units.
I mean  I was from Europe  I was Jewish  I spoke Yiddish  and that was it.
We didnt have any casualties  but we just escaped  just -- just -- and the trouble started then with this -- you couldn't -- and things changed  this -- this Russian commander sort of was good  so long  til is -- he took in some Russian escapees from camp  or whom -- who were [indecipherable] Russian guys  and they didnt like the way they -- they said the Jews are lazy bum -- you know  the Jews are really -- so th e [indecipherable] so he -- he sort of agitated  you know  to be -- you know  h-he wasnt anti-Semitic before  but he -- what they -- what they gave him lessons or something  I dont know.
Well  th-the [indecipherable] the partisans  when the the law cha-changed from Polish to Russian  then back to to Polish.
He was in the infantry in Italy and he was an aerial observer on the Russian front.
We couldnt stay there too long  because after all  they didnt give us that extra piece of bread  so we couldnt do a hide out too much  Interview with Regina Spiegel May 11  1999 6and we finally came out and we spotted th is Russian he was like a probably like a colonel in the army.
He kept yelling in German  and I kept talking to him in Russian and crying  you know  \ My mother.
The Soviets then invaded the part of Poland where you lived.
Its Pavworda   which is the voivodship [names Russian locations] Oh  youve got to repeat that  I didnt catch all of that.
He must have been...officers...a lot of officers were Russian  you know  the Big Red.
Today many of them are Russian rather than of German origin.
I keep checking at that time that I learn English  then I met some people from Poland  they tell me I speak Polish with the English accent.
It was January twenty-one a nd the war was continued until  as you know  until May. So here was all the time moving Russian truc ks and armaments and soldiers.
But one of the things that they did was the Russians -- the Russian Army basically laid down their weapons and became prisoners of war.
They did the same thing what they did  claiming that they are sympathetic to the to the partisan  to the Russian partisans.
So the Russians were free  and the Russian s reported very accurately what went on on the European frontier.
We went to Bratislava which was just recently liberated from Russian domination and we went to the opera.
And...uh...overnight  when we passed...call it...uh...you know from the Russian side to the American side.
During the day we saw the planes flying over  you know  very low and the Russian would say we could -- you could see the pilots in the plane.
We went through the city which was under siege and you could see the demolished buildings  people dying  horses of some Russian soldiers.
I see a Russian soldier  I run because I had incidents with a Russian soldier which I didnt tell you  whic h I wrote if you are interested.
And at that time we saw already Russian doctors  Russian nurses.
After the liberation  all of us  the Jewish Partisans  the Polish Partisans were integrated into Polish govt.
He knew the villagers  the villagers shopped from him  the villagers knew him and he knew them and he went to them and begged them  because he knew the two year old would be a hindrance  no matter what happened  we did not know what would happen  but a two year old would be a problem and nobody wanted to take in the kid and my cleaning lady said  why should they  I mean the kid will stick out  the kid didn't speak Hungarian  the kid didn't speak Russian  the kid could only speak Yiddish and if one takes it in  somebody's going to inform on that person because everybody had enemies  that's the kind of world it was  everybody had enemies in the village  everybody had enemies in the town and at first opportunity they informed on other people like that and I said well they could have hid the child somewhere  so  no  nobody wanted the kid.
I go up the mountain  I get a hand grenade  come down the mountain and there is bunch of Russian commando groups who just looking for somebody just like me to walk ahead of them  okay?
So I started to be scared to tell cause my husband told me  but I...I will not tell because these Russian s  they can...they can  so I...I...I didn't...I...I was thinking I told...so they didn't want to tell me.
That was the first thing  with the first Russian thing  so that was one.
At some point  about an hour -- its about a three hour drive  he was telling me that he had been suffering from stomach problems  and his wife Vera  a magnificent Russian grand dame  was from time to time su -- supporting him  he said  ﬁYeah  yeah  oh shes been very  very sick at times.ﬂ But at some point he said  ﬁLook  I -- Im -- Im feeling some pains now  would you ask the driver to stop at the next gas station  because I have a thermos bottle with milk in my valise  and I need to ﬂ -- of course  of course.
So what they did is they threw all the Jews out of Zaleszcyki  the rest of the Jewish community   and threw us into the same town that we were during the Russian occupation  to Tluste.
Well  the word went they taking us probably to Russia  Siberia.
They wanted to know if that Russian crossing point was closed permanently or whether it would be opened again  the reason being that they had made all kinds of preparations before they used that crossing point.
I can see my friends all di e in the part in the partisans and in the ghettoes and a Ukrainian like this  who worked together with the Germans  hes [indecipherable] hell told me I am a dirty Jew  he cannot live any more on this world [indecipherable] The general the general came  he said  [indecipherable] Bilmis [speaks Russian] friend  what punishment you want?
And maybe some of them were in Russia that they came later on.
They didnt aim at that  the Russian soldiers  masses  they didnt aim.
I spoke some Russian and Spanish  and of course that didn't suit me for either of the assignments  but I did find that English was the official language of the trial in Japan.
I was born  I mean I was raised and I spoke Yiddish quite a bit  but they spoke Polish only.
We were very remote  you know  we are twelve miles away from the Russian border  the .
It was such an enormous uplifting for me to see th e Russian-German  the Russian soldiers coming into that little... They came on tanks.
And they taught Kazakh in the Russian school  but they didnt take it seriously  just as Kazakh independence was not treated seriously .
And the woman who dictated  then when it was all done  she said  oh  you two two sisters of Russian girls  who finished nine cl asses of the 10 year course  they made more mistakes than Frida Finkelita.
And this Russian looks at him and he says  \ Sacebo\ . (
The only thing  since it was so close to the actual Russian border  they did not want refugees th ere  that's why I was not sent out because took me under his wing  but a lot of peopl e were sent out into deep Russia.
And we were liberated by the Russian soldiers and when they found all of us being so sick and weak and emaciated  they took the very  very sick ones into the local hospital and took the other ones that were not quite as sick and placed them into home s where the German Nazis ran away from when they saw that the war was over and they were afraid that th ey going to be caught and punished.
The Russian line was in trenches on one side and the German other side.
So he took a few Russian people and started to dig up in the basement and he was burie d. They took the money  but they killed him on top of it.
14 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD >> Bill Benson: Regina  as the war was coming to a close  the Allies advanced  the Russian Allies advanced  and the Russian forces the allies continued to move you deeper.
So a Interview with Hannah Kalman May 20  1999 46young soldier came over and he ask me what language I can speak and I told him  a little bit German  a little bit Polish  a little Russian  so he spoke German  not too well  but he spoke.
He comes by  he drives closer  I recognize a Jewish  um a Russian soldier.
Its not a zone  but you know  Russian sphere of influence; whereas my father  having been born in Sosnowiec and grown up in Silesia  spoke German language  went to German schools and really was this very organized  straight  very precise type of man  which they describe as a Jeke  you know  whereas  you know  this is in no way derogatory  never.. What I meant to say that he was really very much German  rather than Polish sort of thing  but of course he spoke Polish beautifully.
The Russian army came over and we were liber ated and under the Russians we didnt show anti-Semitism.
She had a husband who was a Hungarian Jewish officer and they -- the Germans put those in the front of the Russian line so they should kill them.
He knew if he gives up that position to be lagerfuhrer  he will have to go to the Russian front.
But a Russian officer told us there was no transportation  nothing  and his advice is everybody should go back to the country that they came from  to their home.
I'm a Polish citize n.\  He say  \ You eat Russian bread  you have to take.\
Maybe its because of a 63 small place  they didnt know that we are Jews or that -- they call me Szurka  thats -- that was a Russian name.
We--I went to school for a while  techni cal school  and I remember we had our teacher from a big factory from--he was in cell completely  he run away from the Russian front and he was teaching us.
Do you -- They spoke Russian when they didn't want me to understand.
I went with a friend  a Russian 17 speaking friend  and we went to Kiev and we asked if anybody would take us to this place which is about 150 kilometers from Romney a nd everybody shied away and said  no you need a special permit  this is a closed country.
You know the Russian authorities at that time  most of the occupiers.
I put my hand to my throat  my mouth  and I said  ﬁOh please dont say anything.ﬂ And the Russian soldier understood what he said  or he had a feeling.
So thousands  and ma ybe tens of thousands of Russian laborers and employees who had a vacation lined up over there and were caught in the war.
I learned Yiddish  also  and I learned to speak with a Polish accent.
I says  I di never spoke Russian  so you couldnt have be en speaking to me in Russian.
Interview with Adam Szymel January 25  2015 17 They spoke language which is very sim ilar to Russian  so later when when we were in Russia  I had the very easy time learni ng Russian  because I was already exposed to Belarussian language  which is  like I said  is very similar.
They not ask me anything  because that already  they told me they are very busy because the Russian Army is very close.
When you say Russian uniforms  what is it -- what -- Russian uniform from -- The ar -- -- their prisoners of war.
And the Russian front -- one of my brothers  especially  he was like the first one there.
If you have that the ger Russian lady  says 90 percent they were Russians.
And when I learn that he is Russian  I told him I am not going to answer  because I dont trust Russians.
And -- but the Russian system at that time  and I think that it's coming back to what it was at that time  they considered you guilty until proven innocent.
It turned out th at because of the approaching Russian front and the chaos on the road  the truck didn't arrive that day.
In Russian  if you want to be nice  you say oh  .
Did they speak Polish amongst each other  or Yiddish Yeah  as a matter of fact  they spoke Yiddish normally  but Polish when they didnt want us to know what they were talking about.
My uncle who was with him  he saw it  he run to the street  and the the Russian tanks  you know  were coming  you know.
You know  the U...when the Germans was coming in  the Ukrainians were in seventh heaven cause they were tired of the Russian dominance or the Russian Communists.
One of the things that stands out in my mind is uh Russian prisoners of war that were driven through the town and they were in just terrible condition  uh without shoes  without proper clothing  hungry  looking dilapidated and drawn and went begging  of course  for food and water and if somebody attempted to give them...or couldn't hand it to them  throw toward them  uh anything  any food and if they caught it or even if they didn't  the Germans beat them and even shot several people if they lunged toward the crowd to receive some food  they shot them  and that was I think the first awareness of the brutality of those people.
And we were so lucky that the Russian invasion stopped before our border.
Teachers were Russian  and they were teaching us Russian at that time.
The train stopped in Italy  in Krakow  from the Russian front.
And so we tried  we would wait when the Russian came  it was before.
So they retreated  and Russian took the hospital  and there was a hospital  with a vo very good doctors.
The city where you and your family lived was under Soviet occupation at that time.
All he want to take a a Russian passport  or he wants to go back home?
Because at the same time  like for there were  you know  all those millions of Russian war prisoners  and forced laborers  and immediately the Soviets had  you know  made a deal with the Interview with Jonas Mekas July 1  2018 225 Americans and British  that they should all go back.
So you had no idea what it was  or No  because there was Jews and non-Jews prisoners and a lot of Russian prisoners in there also  o-on those in the regular barracks  you know  it was very  very big.
A nd after a few weeks they ordered all students return to their classes  but because of the extra-curriculum given by Russians in Russian language in Communist history  in party Communist history  we were taken one year back -- because they told us we complete our e ducation as Communists after two years of indoctrination.
And then  there were Russian soldiers riding and all sorts of other people  and then we got on the train again.
And the intelligence work  which is not very nice as allies  was to send people to investigate what was going on in the British  the American and the Russian sectors.
I was in Lvov medical school  I learn Russian from some colleagues that spoke Russian and I told him and he said that's all baloney  I dont believe one word you say  you must be a spy.
Interview with Mira Zimmerman January 23  2015 53 The Polish army  but the Russian directors are right there.
And one night I would do the stamps  next day he would do the stamps because the apartment that we moved into  the collaborator that lived there was a philatelist  he had collected stamps from all over the world and they were confis cated by that Russian judge and given to me and his son  and the two of us kept the collection going.
Oh yeah  when the Polish when the Polish people caught me with a blan with a with a sheets  the Russian people sold the the way anybody who wants sheets  with a number.
And one Russian came with one rifle  he this way  and another came this way  and you cant move  and my brother   he has to sit like that  and he couldnt do nothing.
Now  when we left Magdeburg in May of 1945  this became a part of the Russian zone.
I see the love the soldier had for that Russian officer  I figured I'm not saying anything that I'm Jewish  nothing.
The Russian were...the Russians were raping  killing  stealing  namely everything else was there.
No  there was Polish  French and Yiddish and I spoke Yiddish.
I came in and I was dressed in a Russian uniform.
My intent is to go over to the Russian part of Poland.
So Boldusov  th-the the Russian  th-t he the strong guy who who who was really a strong guy  he said to me  you can talk [indecipherable] if you want  just tell me whats going on.
A man drove up in a British uniform  a staff sergeant  introduced himsel f as Staff Sergeant Klin e ...and I later found out that he was one of th e first to enter Bergen-Bel sen with the amplifier unit to to to to announce that Belsen would be free in Yiddish and in German and in He brew and in Polish and in Russian.
One of my cousins was in the partis ans too  but the Russian took him out in 1944 and they took him on the front and in anur Bialystok   he he was killed.
That apparently the Russian sort of m ilitary leadership had gotten wind of the German attack because the Germans had  after all  ma ssed three and a half million troops along the border  and there were a number of -- even some German deserters who crossed into Russia and warned them of the attack and theyd been warned from other sides.
And you know  I suppose -- but I remember my parents apparently were -- you know  during that time  you know  sometimes they used t he Russian words or something like this.
She was so...uh...afraid and when he died  we got out from there the first time the Russian came and there was a few Russian men came I remember.
But I unders -- began to understand Yiddish  because all my father and -- and -- and his friends were speaking Jewish.
Most of them they went on the...on the west side  because they wanted to be behind American or English instead of the 29 Russian.
The Russian came in  that's not  was not the Allies  the Russian.
So  were -- going to the Russian zone was in itself something like going to a foreign country.
Interview with Riane Gruss April 22  1994 24 And then what happened was that she tried to contact the Russian authorities to see if she could see my father  or at least her goal was to pick up my little brother from jail.
And I always...I didn't care to be on the...the Russian side.
And I think I remember by the end I was there they brought twelve thousand Russian war prisoners to Auschwitz and as war prisoners  it was winter time  December  they was twenty four hours naked and a very cold night and snow even.
So I had the potential knowledge of Russian  but I never used it  until ‚39 - ‚40  when the Russians came in.
I did not want to stay in the Russian sector at all.
And -- so Margaret's father went up to him and introduced himself and told him that -- that we are Jews  whether -- that's the first Russian word that I learned  Jew means Yvrai in -- in Russian.
Polish  because I learned a little Polish while I was in Poland  and its a Slavic language  and I had a -- I think I have some talent for languages  so I caught on.
When I came in I heard on the radio [Uvaga  uvaga  uvaga and that meant  a ttention  attention  attention in Russian.
There were Polish people  Russian people  Germans  Hungarians; so there was a lot of folks  folks tune singing because they were not only Jews who were in there.
And I used to I used to [speaks Yiddish]   you know.
So  Czechoslo -- Czech was the other language  Hebrew  of course  start to come in very strong and English  which I had to communica te in.
Then they thought we are going to fall into Russian hands  in French hands  in German hands again.
It was some of the people were there  you know  the same way  and the only other thi ng that I remember  other than just just going to school is that one time a Russian  whoever  one of the representatives came in to me and he said  you know  we we lost a couple horses  they escaped  they run away into the steppe and they probably went to this other vil you know  place.
Do you think that Czech -- Do you think the Czech people are more aware  more enlightened?
And all the other military governors were sitting there  and there was  at that time still that instrument which was supposed to be the coordinating instrument  using the Russian term kommandatura  spelled with 32 a K  and that had to be -- that was part of our of-official vocabulary  and -- and I was then directed to move from Frankfur t to Berlin  and I moved there in January of 1946.
Many who built for war in say like the bridges  railroad  toward the Russian front were excused for active service in German army.
Just before war started between Russians and Germans  they came  they left Russian side and they came back to Warsaw and my brother left right away for my parents to Kielce and were there.
They were there to see that things were carried out according to our own United States directives and the Russian directives.
And so he was called up and he -- he was brought down by the guard after whatever  maybe a half an hour and he was hardly down and had sat down and he looked already very disturbed  when another officer  who looked also extremely brutal  ap peared with a -- he had sort of a baton and -- and a sort of wooden stick in front  i-in his hand  waved it in front of that Czech guy and shouted at him in Russian  something that didn't sound very pleasant.
And as a matter of fact  he was also one of the victims  but of another in Vicovnya   which recently was opened up on the Russian  near Kiev  that it was the prisoners  who were not prisoners of war  but prisoners who were taken to full prisons.
No  he kept pretty [indecipherable] my father because this thing of the Russian [indecipherable]  that they shouldnt get anything  that they were all [indecipherable] the same old stories coming over and ove r again  you know  but nothing else.
Now you have to understand we 26 later realized that we were walking into some kind of a military poc ket...the Russians in the back of us and the Allied armies in front of us  and uh in th e middle of the night it was...no  not middle...it it it was just getting dark...the Russian guns really uh sent their shells and they came they came closer and closer  and almost thr eatening and at this moment I said to my frien d...we...I saw some of the Polish people  Polish political prisoners we had in our area  said well  this enough  we run.
Did you have  you had information about what was happening through your involvement with the AK that you knew where the Russian front was and whether they were advancing and so forth?
She said  ﬁHes not a Russian  hes a Jew.ﬂ So what no -- no matter what you do  youre a Jew.
First of all  my parents come from Russia and with the Russian army  they could communicate and then they started to organize different businesses  everything under the government control.
Can you tell me before you tell me a bout going back to your aunt  can you tell me about actually seeing the Russian troops come and liberate?
And when he finished his studies  he was drafted into the Russian army  fought in the se in the first World War  was wounded  became an off wer went to officers school  and became an officer.
He was any anyway  he he was told to the woman  who spoke beautiful Russian because she was born in Saint Petersburg before the war.
There was Polish resistance in both parts of the main streets of it was called at the time in Rovno  I remember there was a militar y church where they were hiding  the Polish police was hiding and as the Russian soldiers with their equipment were coming in they were shooting at them from behind the buildings and some of them got killed an d then they killed all the police that were shooting at them.
And two Russian soldiers passing  and they saw me and they come to my window.
From the P.A. system  we would hear how the Russian brave Army was retreating and so on.
And there was letter P for Pole  R for Russian  you know.
The army taught -- ta ught Filipino dialects and so on be-because thats to enable -- but in our case its was a -- we were supposed to be an underground liaison unit and it was a very intere sting experience because in addition to the language and in addition to subjecting us to have to -- to learn the bible of the Soviet political party  which is called the history of the Communist party of the -- of the USSR  as they called it  which was in [indecipherable] Russian  she taught us literary Russian  and she taught us Russian history.
and the Russian was wondering that we could make a couple of norms in a day in this way.
They had  we lived underground  like they call it in Russian   underground.
And Russian wanted everybody to get Russian passports  and my father was a great Polish patriot  and he would never take Russian passport  so he decided to go back to Germany -- 31 to Germans.
They were all Russians  mostly Russians and there were two of them - he didnt say Jewish becau se he says that they escaped the camp  and they were accepted there  and he says  ﬁThis is the last group.ﬂ He didnt say anything about being Jewish or anything because he didnt know who the Russian is.
Interview with Irena Bach December 12  2015 99 S-So  the Russian people for them  every other person is a spy.
In Plze  they...it was then that portion became ...it was...it was divided in American and Russian zone.
When we walked out  we didn't know if they were Russian or Germans.
When th e time came they evacuated us from the ghetto  I remember distinctly they told us that the front is lying where they were fighting the Russian was getting in danger because they were afraid that we will provide information  we will turn espionage or traitors or partisans against them to help the Russians.
Interview with Maria Pawulska Rasiej May 8  2013 64 But collective farms kolkhoz belongs to the people who are these were mostly Kazaks   Kazakhstan   and few elderly Russian families.
And -- and so I said it was not the fault of Technion  it was the fault of the Russian missile  so were going to build a second one.
This is tape number one  side B. -- wires on the windows so that the soldiers -- the Russian soldiers couldnt get at the women.
And that wasn't easy either  because I was in France  and Slovakia was in a Russian zone.
So so you didnt stay with the Russian group  you formed your own Jewish group?
But most of them  they were like Russian people  Jewish people left over like Zina was left with her father and brother.
Before they arrived there  the Russian television  what is like our Good Morning America  but it's only on Saturday goes out to something like 50 million people.
You have German older people  I'm not talking about the young fellow  I'm talking about the older guards  older guys  maybe they were afraid to go to the Russian front  maybe they - --------  I don't know  I know when they came into th e tailor shop  let's say he needs to put on a button for him  okay.
And we learne d about the tragedies that every day there actions  every day there killings and there were about one hundred thousand Russian Jews  but every day they would kill some of them.
Uh when we came to Lublin  uh there were already a few Israeli uh people  not necessarily Israeli-born  probably Polish born  but who came to organize the Jews and prepare them for the trek to Israel and uh from there we went to Czechoslovakia and then to Hungary and it was all on on the way to uh to get across into the occupied zones other than the Russian occupied zones.
Vienna was under four party occupation but in the middle of the Russian zone so we had to be evacuated.
And when I arrived at the Gleenic Arburger to bicycle across  the commanding officer told not just me  but everybody else  that Russians were reported nearby -- oh yeah  and -- and of course all bridges had been -- had been supplied with explosive charges  so that at the approach of Russian troops  they would be blown up so that they couldn't us e the bridges.
And the -- for example  my mother spoke a lot of Russian.
I found out they ex -- they excavated everybody  and they burned them.ﬂ The whole -- they -- when they liquidated Plaszow  before the Russian came  there were couple hundred people to clean up.
And...My priest get them priest clothes and false documents and we wanted them to go Resikecky you know you took...to bring them over to the Russian area so they could go or to the partisans or somehow closer to the Russians you know  and they wanted to save their life.
Perhaps to many people it was a welcome surprise because out of the two evils  many people thought that if they went to the Russian zone -- in the beginning it was very easy when they divide because the border was not firm -- there was an influx of people both ways and they were not yet -- they didnt have yet a strict instruction  how to handle the border movement across the bo rder.
The military mined themselves so when the Russian soldiers came to remove the bodies  they would blow up.
Those that were deported or ran with the Russian Army whether the Germans attacked  about 80% -- about 90% survived.
And what happened why we didn t see her before  when she ran away  she went with the Russian army to Russia to look for my older sister  she knew she escaped to Russia  looking for her [indecipherable].
We want to be killed by a Russian bullet  not by German.
In the beginning -- Yeah  you had Russian -- the Russian uniforms  yes.
None of us spoke Russian and they only knew sort of a s-smattering of some German words.
On top of it  within a couple weeks of arresting my father  Russians authorities came  lived on the edge of the town and like I said  we had a big house  we had a big barn  they wanted our property  because they wanted to for Russian people to take to live in there.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview & Readings TAMAR LAZERSON ROSTOWSKI pg 6 Interviewed (7-18-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: ever.
And  about a month before the uprising  there came a transport of Russian prisoners of war  Jewish Russian prisoners of war fro m Mins k. Well  in this  this transport  they picked out about 25  30 people  and they were all soldiers  all  one was a captain  that was a Sasha Pechersky   and they wanted anyway  the first day they came that we told them what's going on they want to run away the first day.
I wrote a nother book -- I called in the Russians and compared notes with some Russian experts and I kept writing books and articles and going to the United Nations and going to all these meetings  keeping abreast of what was going on  trying to influence it  and nothing much was happening.
I imagine during the Russian time  there was something  a gathering  a big  big building  and there they dumped us.
And what youre describing is much more the Russian mir system  where where villages were collected in one place.
That was within Polish borders  and some were in the Russian borders.
Now  since we were about gassing  the first gassing actually took place in Auschqitz camp itself and it was the gassing of some 600 Russian prisoners of war.
And he shouted to the Russian  to the soldiers to come over.
But excuse me  the reason why Im being more precise is  wasnt that the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic  or was it the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic?
And I did not join during the Jewish Corps  which was primarily Russian Jews; but a transport company.
Can't be worse th an we are now here in the Soviet Russian communism.
My father was in the Poland  I think more the Russian side.
The Russian s were staying a whole winter  but in Warsaw  you know when they blow it up Warsaw  you what I m ean  preparing for the last attack to go to Berlin.
He became so friendly I told  \ Why do you read the Russian paper.
And then there was occasion I wrote about in the book  I left the [indecipherable] and got the job in another place on the railroad  you know  and somehow we survived like this  that in 1944  in August  were liberated by the Russian army.
My wife remembers few Russian words  she was also in Russia  but I dont remember nothing.
But we were very experienced personnel  for example  uh  we had requisitioned a ton of captured German cigarettes  and we used that to pay the Polish displaced persons who would man our two uh diesel trucks that we carried food  and uh  we had a young man who was the son of a Czech family promi nently in the steel business  uh who uh was edu-  who was brought up with a Scotch nanny and he spoke impeccable English  spoke uh Polish  Russian  German  whatever.
I remember very well...Madame Richter  R - I - C - H - T - E - R  a Russian uh emigre from St. Petersburg for all I know.
And my grandfather decided  well  Germans are culture d people  whatever they said about them is not true  Im not going to deal with those Russian underdogs  we are going back.
The German make a big victorious sign  you know  they start feeling when they start -- you know when the east -- the west [indecipherable] was get and when they start in -- in the Russian -- Russia  you know  they have a -- they have  you know  victory.
Mark had been so wonderful with Russian jury and I thought he would go into international law.
They threw me in a small little army cot with...uh...three more...four or five Russian prisoners.
It was very frightening  but other than that I cant tell you  other than when it settled down and and supposedly law and order was established all over again  and the Russian sys system Was implemented?
Then he was -- I -- I -- I didnt see him a nd he was -- then became a Russian prisoner in Kustrene.
You know  the Uzbeki stans  the nobody talk Russian  only one presidatel   he talk Russian that we could commun communicated with them  and the rest Uzbekistan   they didnt speak eng Russian.
They stopped because the Polish people wanted to be very smart  and they wanted   when -- as the Russians approached Krakow  so they wanted to make the uprise  and the Germans were -- had involve with the Russian USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0052 50 front 10 divisions  so they figured they were busy -- busy with the Russian front  and they will make the uprise  and they will establish an -- a free Poland government.
The Russian soldiers  the men in the house  ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 25 they don't bother the woman.
Yeah  but now we were permitted to talk to Russians  and I remember on the beaches  the Russians  also Russian soldiers  Russian trucks on all the beaches  and we could get these Russian insignias what we called   et cetera.
>> Irene Weiss: In January  winter  in terrible cold  thousands of people who were still surviving Auschwitz were pushed out on the highway and we were made to march hundr eds of miles deeper into Germany  to avoid being liberated by the approaching Russian Army.
I feel that Israel must live because not only then  now is a lot of hope  a lot of people...where would the Russian Jews go now if there wouldn't be Israel.
He was a a how he was not a [indecipherable] he was he was basically a Russian.
And all the peoples are coming  so there are proof there were some da and Ill have to translate from English to Czech  from German to Czech  from Polish to Czech  from Russian to Czech and I am doing all these things  and I have Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 7  1997 65 Im translating.
It was when they came the doctor came to look at your fathers wound  and then your father left  and I should say Soviet military authorities  not Russian military authorities.
That is  what was going on in Germany   and what was going on in Russia ?
I had no idea where the Russian army was standing  and so forth.
And in the large Russian cities  you 7 could work at day and study in the evening.
And one man who was working there  started to talk to me in Russian -- because we didnt know Latvian  it was a strange country for us.
You see  as I told you  we came to Auschw itz when the Russian offensive was nearing  meaning it was already late in the war.
But this was was this before the Germans were there  or Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 14  1997 89 Yeah  before the German  before the So this is the Slovakian army Yeah  bu-but it was because as soon as was the uprising August the 29th  actually the whole  especially in the middle Slovakia   and western Slovakia   the so-called the freedom fighters  and the democratic like organization of they called  like the first Czechoslovak  like a government  took over all the the actually they they were they were they took over the power there in Slovakia most of the Slovakias [indecipherable] most of the part of Slovakia .
When he was 10 he was redheaded and he started reading the Russian encyclopedia  volume one  and simply when on with.\
He was captured by the Russian  and he was there for two years.
Now one of my father's sisters's was married to an Arian German and they lived in Klinicksberg but the two other sisters were married to Russian Jews and they all lived in Grodno.
When you when you traveled back into Kovno with the Russian army  and you saw what had happened to the city  it must have been a it must have been an Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 145 incredible feeling to go back into You mean when I came back to the ghetto?
And there was a meeting in the flat of a officer  Russian officer  where I was -- there was something  somebody higher than the -- I - because nobody spoke when this man spoke.
