And I asked him  I said  \ How come  America with a ll its mighty power  American soldiers are killed every day  what are you doing?\  \
Well they invited the American amba ssador to participate naturally  and so I took them up on it.
I remember them coming up with th e American soldiers and none of them smiled  but I don't think they had any  still had any pity for us.
I just had joined General Electric in order to learn the American system for measuring  and the tool names  and all that  the -- you know  the -- how -- we - we di -- we had the metric system in Europe  and I wasnt used to the system they had here  and so -- so I took that year  and I learned  and I worked  and it was very interesting  I had a very good time  and working with -- with American men  and my boss was a great guy  I -- was totally unknown i-in Holland  something like -- first day I was there  he said  ﬁEd  call me George.ﬂ I said  ﬁThats my boss  I cant call -- call -- call him -- cant call him George.ﬂ But he insisted  it -- it was like Jesus.
The American (you know) troops were going by  and I was there on the side of the ditch  and then I become unconscious.
They are the most respected paper in the psychiatric profession  th ey are the official of the American Psychiatric Association and usually you have to wait months or years for the publication of a paper if they accept it.
But there is a book  exists such a book  the American author of John Hersey.
But how my father got this job  was one time we were on the street walking and there was a guy whispering behind us  and -- whispering with somebody and they were following a couple of American officers and they were -- one was listening to what theyre saying and he would interpret it to the other guy  and I nudged my father  and I said  ﬁLook  I think their spies.
My father had done some fund raising for the American Joint Committee and helped many Jewish refugees.
I was mortally 7 Herbert Tenzer (1905- ); Jewish American attorney and congressman  founder and chairman of Rescue Children  Inc. 8 Rescue Children  Inc; aid organization for refugee orphans founded under the auspices of the Vaad Hatzala in 1946.
I went to the New York Times and spoke to a then reporter who was very known  Charlie Grutzner  told him th at I'm looking for Anna Sabol who married an American  at that time student and they're married and they live right here.
Yes I was st -- I was standing -- I was the fi -- the only one  and when the headquarters of the -- the seventh army  I was the only one that -- that was sworn in as the American citizen that day.
And and we would run with Irka to the to that and that was a airport place that I can I think it was used by American soldiers.
I beca -- security  with a top secret project I was working on  they say USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 49 he cannot be married -- the American army said  ﬁHe cannot be married to a foreigner.ﬂ As a matter of fact  even worse  not to somebody from the East Block country  East Germany  and -- because Im working on -- on a secret project.
Now  the  the factory  the gasoline factory was being bombed once by American long-range bomb ers.
American gifts were coming  because at the time a lot of people were donating things.
The rest of th e crew were all American and German and Austri an.
And through the help of the American soldiers which we met in Austria  they were stationed in Austria  we wrote to my aunt.
I would take real offense if I heard them all Nazi talk  and I have  in the military  on the -- being American uniform  and understanding German  I overheard many things that people said  in outdoor cafe  or what -- someplace.
But they were very  very nice to us because we have heavy luggages and they help us for a package of American cigarettes  we knew this and we had a lot of  10 or 15 package of cigarettes we had  each one of us  the girls  and we give them cigarette just to help us with the luggages.
Were there any American G.I.s who were somehow using their status or their power for nefarious goals?
And he you know  he felt that he had arrived at a really good  American family.
And anyway  we were So you got to the American consul Interview with Stanley Kiersnowski June 20  2014 141 We went to the American embassy to get our visas.
We only mingled with the survivors  and then  naturally  started a business  buying American dollars  buying diamonds  buying watches  exchanging  doing this and that.
So the American took the dog tags out  [and] hung them out.
And I use the word march loosely here because American athletes dont 24 24march very well.
Theres so many stories you hear about people who came to this country  and memeeting American Jews  who have no underst anding of what theyve been through  and how that sometimes caused friction and difficulties.
By the way have you ever come across the name of an American lawyer by the name of Kent  no not American  German lawyer by the name of Kempn er.
And the American gir -- the American girls were a little too fast for me.
So  when I came to this country  he was the one that met me in New York and he and his wife  who was American born  and -- took me to New Jersey.
Direct communication between England and Germany was no longer possible  and it will come directly through friends or relatives in neutral places  like Amer ica  or Shanghai   or some South American countries.
And then Arthur Burns said  ﬁWhy dont you make a counter-suggestion and have him come to the American cemetery in Luxembour g instead?ﬂ And I said  ﬁWhy dont you  Arthur?ﬂ And he said  ﬁWere both passing the buck.ﬂ And he said  ﬁIm the host ambassador and if I get involved its really a violation of protocol.
I don't know what we would have done with the German American Bund.
So they were traditional  they seemed to me very American names.
All we knew that was we were heading for Munich and we knew the b ig SS headquarters north of Munich which later became an American base was very heavily fortified.
Because you had more in common  the American people had more in common with the American people.
And again  I do not know  I was too young  I dont know if my father ever contacted the American consulate in Berlin  I do not know.
And I went over there  and they had somebody  an American who is Polish descent  so he -- he translated here  because I didnt -- couldnt speak a word of English.
And there was American author  Gerry Posner  who also  by the way  files closed about the killing of Kennedy .
And the reason we were being replaced was that the Germans were hiding their best spri nters and saving them to upset the American team in the four hundred-meter relay.
She arranged -- they arranged the little chapel in the basement and we used to pray 24 hours  you know  novena for the safe [indecipherable] from Warsaw because we were under shells  and i-it was horrible  horrible time  and the bombs  you know  Germany used to bombs  and American used to bombs  and everybody  you know  and we were there  you know  in the middle of this shooting.
I was very happy outside of I also didnt mingle that much with because there werent that many survivors  you know  my husband was American  so I didnt mingle that much with  you know but I was happy  I blended I thought I blended in  I I n I never admit it.
They learned all the Presidents  the capitals  you know  everything that in those days you had to learn all that to become an American citizen.
But when they found out  even though I had been naturalized in the army as an American citizen during my basic training  they wouldnt send me because I was still considered an enemy alien  even though I was a citizen and a Jew.
That means it was a human  much better way to be self-destructive  than to have the British and American aircrafts coming over and bombing.
He became a captain and he was sent back to Belgium and lived in our home in Belgium as a captain of the American army.
So I went from Linz to Salzburg to the American Consul and I asked the consul  there was always German girls working in the consul  when you get to the consul  so I would bribe them with some chocolate or some cigarettes and they would always say to me  Mr. Her Pantirer  your papers are a little bit higher  from the bottom a little bit higher  a little higher.
No sooner we were back in the wagons  the American fighter planes came and started to bomb all around us.
And somehow I remember h -- the happiness when I saw American soldiers on the subway  it was great.
The standing joke was  among the Americans  if everybody in Germany  at least in the American zone  who was black marketing was put into jail  there'd be nobody left to guard them.
>> Fritz Gluckstein: At that time -- the Russians  American  British and the French.
Coming -- while we were on the ship  we were given certain spending money  American money  we going over United State.
But I have one memory at the end of the war  I remember  it was -- we were standing in front of my house with my family  I think  and two tanks came with either American or Canadian soldiers  and the Germans stood in between the soldiers  in between the tanks  and they threw their hands up in the air and their weapons fell down  and the soldiers threw us gum  which weve never seen  like  you kept that piece of gum and chewed on it  I think  for two weeks.
One day I had a visit from a man who was the General Counselor to the American Joint Distribution Committee.
5 American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee; Jewish American relief organization founded in 1914.
But I always consider myself American  which is really funny  that even before the war  my dad always told me that he was American  so I considered myself American.
And then I was pleased to find that in the U.S.  you get your citizenship papers  you get your passport  and you are a -- an American by passport.
By f -- our first exposure to a real American woman who was super-American.
>> Peter Gorog: Yes  I returned the first time in 1989 when I became an American citizen and I was able to go back to Hung ary.
We were prepaid to San Francisco and then the American company would not recognize the ticket.
And I never had anybody really to speak German with or to exper -- have related experiences with and I didnt know anybody who because I was thoroughly Americanized and my family was American.
Was other things at one point  organization  some  some German book  if I recall    American book  Upton Sinclar  it's a book .
As a whole  I believe the American people I never could condemn.
So this organization  the Jewish organization called Jewish American Joint Distribution Committee  put the funding -- in other words  they guarantee that -- they guarantee that we would not become a public charge.
There was a series of pictures prepared by the American army for Germans so they would know how horrible the camps were.
And within three weeks  I was able to come into the United States as a resident  cause I married an American.
After the war  Jacques and Annette were placed in orphanages  then later adopted by an American couple  Harry and Rose Fein.
Remember  there wa s a non-fraternization law  and American personnel were not permitted to fraternize with Germans.
But still it was the tail end and we were not part of the initial What did it mean to you to become a citizen of the United States  an American citizen?
I do not know just what -- what it is about -- the American Jews  they are a completely different breed.
I just never  ever -- as much as I was frightened in Europe of -- of what was happening and that I could be captured and that I could be killed and that I wouldnt be living  I think the moment I got on American -- the moment we were accepted to go to America   to me this was an act of faith and I never  ever believed that we were going back.
In 1950  bec -- I didnt have to wait fi ve years because my visa was based on my -- on Elizabeth being an American citizen.
I wa s working also with the Agoutis Historic movement there and I  groups of childr en and to others and I send children to camps in summer and so forth  I did this all there and I instituted someth ing in Baltimore  three things I instituted there because I thou ght  it is in the American heir that they are a little bit  so big  at least it was at that time  to be a little bit more distant.
But we  I dont feel as though uh I was an American athlete  or that I was a Jewish athlete.
So  United States ships were not going anywhere  and we had reservations on some sort of ship  but American export.
And thats that section of Prague had all these American presidents name  probably just to show gratitude that they made Made.
Did it make you feel different to be an American citizen?
And the same for the Interview with Charles Stein June 8  1999 76American gathering of of what its American Gathering of Holocaust Survivors.
When the repatriation would start  then they ship you.ﬂ But unfortunate  I had a piece of paper that I...I came from Czectachowa and the American soldiers saw Czestachowa and Czestachowa sounded like Czechoslovakia.
Well  I trained here with American Marines for the final hit against Japan.
106*0143 58 When you were with studyi ng with this young American so ldier  was he helping other Jewish children?
And after the war  particularly after meeting American soldiers  and many of them Jewish  I was surprised actua lly to hear that there was large scale antisemitism in this country and that the influe nce of these Jews was a relatively minimal.
He issued orders  after he had first visited Dachau  that American military commanders should bring their units to see Dachau so that the troops might know what they had been fighting against.
In Israel they had to close American consul ate because they were selling Arab visas.
But you wanted to get the German influen ce out of those  and th at was the reorganization aspect: trying to introduce  primarily at that time  American enterprise to come in and take over these enterprises.
And my Dad liked them very much too and thats why it was such a surprise to me when I played ba seball in the Canadian American league  professional baseball on opening day when um the team I was playing with the Rome Colonels  Rome New York Colonels   um frankly uh had a  an opportunity that no one really ever gets automatic ally.
And I actually sat the -- the kids down and explained to them that they had been invited  and this is what Memori al Day was all about  and so forth and so on  and that I myself owed something to the American soldie rs  but at -- at this particular time  this also meant something that I did not want to share  th at I didnt believe in  and that I felt was wrong.
He was an American consul  so they thought he had some authority.
Im glad we are proud of them again  th at they were Germans of the Jewish religion  who won the Nobel Prize.ﬂ But I never could convince this American that I married a German  and several times happened to me here  in particularly Jewish people.
The first ti me I met him  hes big  and I said oh  Interview with Sabi na Berggren January 30  2015 145this guy looks like a true American bully excuse me guys.
You were afraid that could have been an American POW camp?
Or they were working in the laundries with the American women  and we were out there busting our backsides out in the hot sun.
I mean  we took American phony I.D.s  and we went to the streetcar  and the guys that ticket  you schlop in the -- the guy didnt know what the hell I have.
Uh this food was still in the wa rehouses in Paris  was appearing in the French black marketŠin other words the parcels were being stolen from the warehouses and uh this uh American officer said to me if you go to the Quartermaster General and ask for th ese parcels for the prisoners of war  they might be given to you.
And the American consulate in Berlin contacted Dr. Simon and said  why are you not returning this to Lillyan Rosenberg?
And I wanted desperately to leave the Russian sector and be in the American sector.
A2: No  he said he told us that American when they come  they want to see the golem.
Many priest was liberated from Dachau concentration camp  so they come and the one we have in our camp  and I was work with him in the school  in the church because also was so many families the German take to work on the farm  so they left the farm when the American came and they come to camp.
I'm right now in Italy in Modena and through the help of an American Jewish soldier  I was able to mail it to you.
Well  he could have gone to the registration office  any high school kid could have told him that th ere were SS men buried in the American military ceme -- Waffen SS.
I went to school -- that doesn't sound early by American standards  but actually earlier than by Croatian standards at the time.
So we boarded a streetcar in Vienna and with the streetcar we went to the American side of Vienna and we stayed in th e Rothschild Hospital in Vienna.
We started speaking together at the time  when it started  but when I joined the American [indecipherable]  I stopped speaking.
And it so happened you know  life is so strange that way so happened that an American qua the head of the American Interview with Ursula Marx June 8  2016 41 Quaker was visiting that friend that man in London   at the time  Dr. Balderson .
And so one day  since he was th e engineer  he used to build the scaffolds to hang the people who were found guilty of massacring unarmed American soldiers.
And so he got a great number of of letters every day  with people pleading for assistance to save their life by getting an American visa  if they could.
But then I realized I was alone in this world  and luckily when I arrived at Friedberg  I got a ride with a -- an American  with two American soldiers as soon as I came to Holf and Saxon  they gave me a ride to Birkenback in Germany  and from there some trains were leaving  going towards Frankfurt  and I took a train to Hanau  which was very close to Friedberg  because the train from Frankfurt di d not go to Friedberg yet.
Well  anyway -- This is a photo of Birkenau extermination taken by the Americans by satellite probably on 13th -- Not satellite; by American bombers.
And even a s far as  which is of some significance with regard to the question that has been raised  the integration of refugees into American life.
And a few days later  officially the Americans took us A2: It was American Interview with Joseph Koplewicz October 7  1993 63 from because I was born in Germany  so they took us back to Germany and since then we were there  waiting always that well go someplace  and this waiting  waiting was til 1949.
But  you know  I was so into being an American lady  an American mother  raising Am erican children and even giving them names like my oldest daughter  her name is Betty Lou (ph.).
I guess I was 13 or 14 when I came here  and really adopted very fast to -- and of course we all wanted to adopt to the American.
And then he walked back and talked to the pri to this surgeon to the doctor  and came back and he brought ice pick  jar with some fluid  a scissors and paper bandages  because there was no other bandages during the war  no cotton in Europe because blockade  American and British navy you know  dont get any dont se dont they cannot bring any cotton  or coffee  for example.
I unders tand that there were about 80 000 American casualties  and a 100 000 German casualties in about six weeks.
But I -- I don't feel any smertz for loss because I'm an American.
And so we were granted three visas  residence visas to the Dominican Republic   and on the basis of that visa  we got one week transit visas from the American consul in Tokyo.
Suddenly -- you see  this area was near the coast  and besides the money -- whoever supported this home  whichever organization supported which could have been American.
And then one one day before the liberation  be fore the American came  they made appell and they says that we all have to go into these mountains there  because its going to be a big fight now  between the German mi litary and the American.
I'm giving it to an American soldier  and I don't know which one of them will forward directly to you  and she got all five  and she said thank God you wrote that because I would have said poor child is really not right.
I do know that I met  the day before I left in  lets say  the Yugoslav portugates   the German on March 27 th  and like on March 28th or 29th  I was on the main square and I ran into two friends of mine from hi gh school  two guys  and I said  ﬁGuys  were leaving.ﬂ Because  by that time  we already had our American visa and everything else  and one of them  who was a Communist  who la ter became director of the Zagreb theater  and the other one  whos father became director of the University under the Ustashe  were standing there  these are my really close friends from school  and they said  ﬁNow you are leaving  when we need you?!ﬂ I said  ﬁYoull have to do without me.ﬂ These people were activists  but they didnt do anything  collaborated.
Still today  when I see an American flag  for instance  not necessarily Polish  something grabs my heart  and I am ready to take the hat off my head.
Because members of the American Army were uh a broad cross section of the American people.
Well  the the s the next thing that made a tremendous impression was in this six week course a-a-at Yale  which was for students 20-odd students from different countries all over the world who were coming to to study for year  and this was sort of a conditioning  American studies  you know  so they would not get too much of a culture shock because university here was different from university in their own countries.
If you are in military age and you get asked to serve in your military in of your country  which appear to be American  U.S.  serve  and serve proudly.
Now what -- of c ourse  we wanted to -- to leave Germany  and the destination was very easy for us to d ecide  because Daves -- Dave knew that he has a sister in New York  but Dave was lib erated by the Americans  and one of the American army personnel promised him to get in touch with his sister  which he did  and we started even receiving letters from her  and of course our destination  because of that  was to go and join his sister  her husband  and they had a -- a son who was going to college  studying accounting.
I was national director for 18 years  and I resigned last July  and -- in protest  fra nkly  because I didnt like some kind of a statement of the president of the Polish American Congress  which in my view had an aanti-Semitic undertones.
I think then it was called the American Joint Distribution Committee.
And then we -- I -- I had to -- you know  in the meantime I applied to American embassy for the visa  and for my vi sa  I dont know why I had to wait so long.
Absolutely 100 percent American  and thats the reason -- I tell you wh y I feel 100 percent am -- because I have the right  and I have the privilege of criticizing.
When we were all on the sidewalk  the German guards lined us up with guns  and told us to march and find the American front.
There's an American Councel there attached to the British Headquarters  take somebody  an American  a military or non military  have him stand there as the boxes are opened and check the inventory  and then leave it there.
More like the American  that you went to school through sixth grade and then you went to High School for four years.
And then came the American soldiers  but like one of my friends said  his friend was communist.
The All American football players like Marshall Goldberg  they brought national recognition to the school.
Married an American young woman in 1952  and we have three children.
He came to the States late in 48  and in 49 with th -- with that outbroke -- break in Korea  he was drafted in the American army  and he  believe it or not  was sent back to Germany  in the same places where he wore a -- a -- as a camp inmate -- Im meaning as a DP camp inmate  there he was serving with the amer -- with the US uniform  as a soldier.
I (cough) I was uh able to secure a date from the American consul in very rapid order.
And [indecipherable] over there at that time  while the other came in American -- ga -- custody.
Uh  I wrote this in a letter to my wife  which was published in the uh  reproduced in the book put out by the American Jewish archives  and uh  Rabbi Klausner read it  and he and I carried on a very short correspondence  and what he said I think is worthy is repeating.
He could be mistaken for an American if I met him on the st reet.
And then we were able to get an American visa because the Austrian quota  which had been oversubscribed for years  was suddenly open because nobody could leave Austria anymore.
So  after you went through American schools  did you end up going to high school  I guess  in Irvington  or?
And then when I saw the American troops were parading the Germans in trucks to go and pick up these people; they took you  people go pick ‚em up   and they couldnt get over Š t he Germans Š how many Jewish people were killed in that forest .
NICK WHITE: Yes  but it seemed like before this there had been some  maybe a purpose to be gained by giving a life  we as Americans felt we were fulfilling a tremendous responsibility  and the American soldier laid his life on the line.
I was thanking then all the blacks  so when we coming in  they took in in in and they (cough)...what I remembered they took in a in the the American trucks what they had showers  and they...it's...and they they took my clothes and they bathed me and they washed me  and from there and from there they took us in a in a van with a little uh you know  in to...they made a hospital and from there they carry me in the hospital and they had doctors come in and looking and they had brought in I think German nurses  German doctors  and once and over the American black doctor  Dr. Brown ...I don't know where where he is or whether he's still alive or not...he saved my hand and he saved my life because I don't know I fall in love to him.
Uh...in...in 1940 when I finished...uh...no...let's go back to 1937...uh...when I cam e to American.
Blancka and I stand next to the fields and su ddenly one of the roofs of the ta nks opens up and a young soldier  American soldier  in Yiddish which he thought was German  so he says  Fraulines!
That time I worked as a -- beginning as a stenographer and for the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0023 53 duration  I worked as a detective in crime bureau and also part time  I worked with a American army CIC with Captain Vulcanovsky.
He put an ad in the American Jewish Journal or whatever...it's a paper in New York...and a cousin of my grandfather read it and they sent a telegram to America because the other cousin's son  the man that married me  was with the American forces near Munich and within a couple of weeks he came to see me and by then  you know  I had gained weight and they had given me some clothes and this is the picture... Where were you living then?
The state was formed in 1 919  as part of the Versailles Treaty at the insistence of the American President Wilson  self -determination of the people  and huge portions of Hungary with seated to the minorities that lived there.
Well and I think we must have gotten some sort by HIAS or by the there were two American organizations that helped Joint?
And so they got the American Army to send two of those two and a half ton trucks over to come and get them.
So I went over to the American  and I said  this is masters who killed millions of people.
Its -- its -- its very strange  because of course  as a European  I didnt know many bad things about Poland  what they did to the Jews and this and that  but as an American  now  I met a lot of people whose descent is Polish and its nothing but rotten.
When I went to the consul -- to the American consul in Genoa  caus e from Turin  you had to go to Genoa  and I showed them that I was accepted at the University of Illinois and that was beginning of February  of ‚48.
I was somewhat associated with the American Jewish archives in Cincinnati and I thought they might go there but my brother and his I believe that he wanted to hold onto them.
We were fully covere d. So Michael took advantage of that and uh  make his long story afterward short  he was adopted by an American soldier  non-Jewish soldier  to come to the United States.
He went -- he went to Chile  and worked there in the -- in the American embassy.
It was a burden because and and the burden continued for many years  because I felt this tremendous loyalty towards my American parents.
And  from what I heard is that the American Red Cross got word that th is was going to be the end of the camp and they were going to destroy this whole camp with everybody in it.
I waited for another week and an American ship from the in Baltimore came in  a freighter with the name of Mary.
People were critical of certain European ways  and I could not get us ed to some of the American ways.
In Toronto I went to the American consulate and applied for a visa and it was necessary then to come in under the so called quota.
Well  I told you about my father  who was an American.
Now  there is a British consul in Smy-Smyrna   there was a an American consul in Smyrna .
It was a staff officers jo -- assignment  and -- which was good for my record  and my boss was an Italian American  lieutenant colonel  whom I got along with very well  but actually  I found out when I -- shortly before going to Germany  that I was supposed to go to Berlin.
This gentleman  who was in the armed forces  the American one  David Eisenberg  a redhead -- I remember him so well.
Originally my name was V-o-v-k  when I lived in France and I changed my name to V-o-c-k when I became an American citizen.
I was still lying down on the ground  and suddenly the -- it was dark already  and we heard American planes -- or were -- they were Russian planes  actually.
God bless and uh and Israel and God bless America  because I'm an American citizen and I'm for America hundred percent.
Well as far as the boycott is concerned  I think the American government definitely should have boycotted the Olympics in Berlin just like they boycotted the Russian Olympics and now they would have all the more of the facts than I ever had and I think it was definitely a mistake that they didnt boycott the Olympics in 1936.
But he would never cease to speak his mind when the Russian delegation  th-the -- the -- and then east German delega tion came to the house  the talk was -- of course I kept my -- my mouth shut  h-he said  ﬁYou know  Im a -- Germany -- West Germany is only a colony of the American s.ﬂ And my husband  you know  shook his head and said  ﬁYeah  just like East Germany is a colony of the Soviets.ﬂ Yes  absolutely.
The American bombers we still watched how the American bombers were using that 44 machine gun  I dont know what they call it  but they were machine gunning the th-the gas tanks and blowing up all the all all those planes.
You don't need binoculars on the highway that this American Army was coming through.
Then when there was uh uh start bombing  American and English uh so we was happy because we see the...you know  American bomber and dozens of them  but there was...was very hard.
So the H unga--uh  The American Refugee Board has been erected  and the gentlemen by the name of Olsen has been sent to Sweden to find a person who would go with a mission to save people in Hungary.
I assimilated  I grew up  I was an American teenager  I was married  you know.
The reason why it was difficult  number one  in order to apply for an American citizen  you had to know how to speak English .
They had two Polish officers who were interpreters  and they had American with German backgrounds who were interpreters.
Another group that played a big role  in fact they paid for the actual boat trip  the ship trip  was the American Friends Service Committee  the Quak ers.
In America   the American Jews will be  I know from iga I got money.
I know it was a American destroyer well  American ship of some type  which was converted to a passenger.
Uh I communicated with uh the uh Joint Distribution Committee in New York  through military 6 channels  and I was cabled from the JDC but th rough the Jewish Welfare Board which was the only organization set up to deal with American Army Jewish chaplains.
And then  afterwards  I mean the McCarthy hearings and so forth  the un-Ame rican committee  see that it's not American again  not too much American.
For example  for some period of time  American citizens were exempt.
In London and Belgium and Australia  all due to American salmon.
I just didnt like Hannaliese was not an American name  so I wanted to just not be that.
I dont know exactly when along these 8 months  but they were told not to pursue crimes against other people other than Americans; that they should pursue war crimes against Americans  which basically meant war crimes against the American flyers who parachuted down and then were killed by the local Nazis.
There were a couple of survivors  one American  one Canadian and one British and I talked to them and they told me they came home and they told their parents what they went through in Buchenwald and their parents told them you're just telling stories.
And we got these [indecipherable] sure we were asked to come to the consulate  the American consulate.
The American and the Interview with Eli Dortort August 3  2005 21British.
One time came to me in Germany an American officer  and said his grandmother is from 46 Lodz  Poland  and she looking for relatives  and he told me the last name.
And here we got  I dont know  a few thousand ready  and the ger the American [indecipherable] stop the press.
So the next time he came back to town  he brought my he heard from my aunt  he brought us goodies  and every American Jewish soldier that came through town  came to our house and brought us things.
During the siege of Warsaw in 1939  there was an American photo reporter by the name of Julien Bryan   who came voluntarily three days after the siege  and was taking pictures  movies.
and couldnt quite believe it either  or c hose not to know the whole picture  did you s -- did you find that in -- true for the Jewish American community  as well as for -- USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0052 73 Yes  yes  I accuse the Jewish community also  because -- and I give you exan -- again example.
Then I was such a strong American believer  so strong anticommunist  cause I knew what that was  communism  that I almost went along with that that program and and almost.
I told him I had simply come to see how well the American Army under his command was taking care of Jewish survivors in the Austrian camps.
And  he said the next day we rushed to the American Consulate.
Why I didnt give it to an American colleague  I dont know.
Did the people whose ancestry -- no  th-the people who were more American in terms of generations  did they see things differently than you and your friends did?
You came to Pilsen and then we went the American occupation zone.
Of course she was a child  but I heard about somebody  somebodys mother around was born in Vienna but she wanted to be completely American.
Then we didn't know what to do with these two guys  so we phoned and an American military policeman came and took them away with great joy and I ended up with a camera.
I know they wore military uniforms  but whether there were civilians in the uniforms or American or any other nationality that shot him  you know  so.
And this Lithuanian translator whom I who was also our fam ily friend  so he was telling us that one of the American journalists took him away and said  look  you know  this  all those killed people  thats thats what the Germans did  didnt they?
>> [Lau ghter] >> Frank Liebermann: And in June  we were called to Berlin to have a physical at the American Embassy.
ﬁBernstein  Philip Sidney.ﬂ 45 Menasha Skulnik  American comedian  popular star of New Yorks Second Avenue Yiddish theaters.
There might have been  and I don't remember  there might have been some other American troops there and I think there were  b- from our battalion headquarters  the ninth armored infantry battalion headquarters  who got the message and they came  some of them came up there.
There was one soldier he was speaking Russian it was American soldiers  and he says  ﬁWhat's wrong with you?ﬂ I say  ﬁbu55  bu  boli56  schmerzen 57.ﬂ And he took me in the Jeep  and it wasn't far away and drove me in to a town called Muhldorf and put me in hospital new  and I got good you know  cleaned out and the surgeon gave me farina  milk and sugar every day.
And this doctor came  too  who was in this actually he was with the American army and the C.I.A. and but he was a a doctor from Germany.
>> Sylvia Rozines: When we went to Berlin  right away we went to the camp which was American.
So when we finally were able to come to a point where we could buy some American dollars  it was a big point because th at was a turning point.
How would you rank Jewish  Holocaust survivor  American  husband  father  as part of your identity?
They took the affidavit to the American embassy  and here I must say a word about the foreign service Yes.
23 ROUGH DRAFT COPY NOT A VERBATIM RECORD They were the size of like double sheets hanging on the fronts of houses  British  French  American  Canadian.
Now  we knew that the American allied soldiers were coming westward  but they didnt get far enough for us to get out  whatever.
So that we had an el derly lady there I remember  a Mrs. Scholl  who was an American woman who I guess was re living as she was widowed.
I mean  this conference is just a reminder  and that what what and that magazine had contri contributed to the to the American film community  and the world.
When they told me my stories -- I had American friends  couples  and Holocaust survivors a nd two of them told me they were in concentration camps.
That's why I used to call the American army the   the the chocolate eaters  you know.
And in 1937  two of these American and Canadian brothers were visiting the community in Germany just the time when the Nazis...uh...confiscated the whole lot.
We went to a nother city  where we had friends there  and -- that survived  and we stayed there for awhile  fi -- not too long  and from there  we went to -- we escaped to Czechoslovakia  and to Germany  to the American zone.
At one point in that evening an American soldier came in and he had looked at the lists that the UNRRA20 and the HIAS21 had printed of survivors and as much information as they could  the origin and birthplace of the people.
I had to learn American history  I had to learn English  but math and geography  I passed the Regents Exams  so that I graduated early and went to college at the age of 16.
He said  \ Nothi ng to worry about \  he said  \ She's just pregnant  with an American soldier  one of the prison guards.\
He didn't want to leave  he thought he'd rather stay there with the American nurses.
Well  to get out at that poi nt...the American marines were all leaving.
It was interesting and thats a sideline that I knew there was a big kerfuffle at the beginning  in the American room they they stupid ly  they there was one other German girl  and I dont know why th ey would put us togeth er in a room with with a Greek girl and an Italian girl  and they put all four American girls into one room.
I couldn't get to China on...on a Pan American  and I had to wait for a whole week in Hong Kong before I could get a ship up the coast to Shanghai.
But when you get an American immigration visa--which is hard to get  because you need to prove that you can sustain yourself and  you know  you're not going to land up being on welfare or burden to anyone in this country  uh ...and that you are good health and so.
Although the American Ive got the name of the agency  the refugee agency taking care of orphans was working  they were working very slowly  and I just couldnt bear the thought that there were kids without families still sitting in Austria and this is what?
She worked across the street from the American Embassy  and one day she got a call and asked whether she still wanted to get to the United States.
Because she was American  or And is there something that you learned from this tape  this interview  thinking that again  this took place over 40 years ago  this interview  in 1974.
At the time were talking about now  51 - 52 and thereafter  the captured records in American government custody  were all secured and classified.
And I became national director of the Polish American Congress  which is an umbrella organization.
So Chaim opened his vault during our meeting and he showed me copies of all the letters I wrote and he was arrested by an American town major because he objected to the anti-semitic signs.
And What were American kids  compare you know  you had gone from a German school in a in a in an totalitarian state Right.
We should have been bombed by the Americans far more  and of course everything turned out much worse when finally they shot down one of the American bombers and he fell into the Danube and the Hungarian Nazis took him out and they hanged him right there.
Did the other your fellow American soldiers that you were with  did they know you were keeping the diary?
And I was always very much aware of my lack of education  because there were all these American women  with all their degrees and this  that and the other and what did I have a degree in -- And in this area  especially.
And the next miracle was  when I got American affidavit I needed permission to come to America  I didnt think I would get it.
And  when I was liberated  I worked in an Army  American Army hospital for a little while.
97 It was a good time [indecipherable] It was a good time that -- then I dont know where my brother fi rst went to work  but he -- as soon as the American troops came in  he got a j ob at the airport  and I got a job at another machine shop  which was quite filthy.
If it were not for the sacrifice of these American soldiers together with Canadians and British and some French  ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 30 who were not following the collaborationist government  I wouldn't be her e today.
They run away from a stalag  from a regular war prisoners camp  and they was caught by Flossenburg and they was brought to Flossenburg  and after their questioning  they was executed  those two Amer ican pilots  and theyre in a death valley in Flossenburg  they got the ledge  and American flag  and you can read on that ledge -- it is a big ledge  you know  six feet long and about 36 inches wide  about eight inches high  you know?
And then  you know  we have to go to the American zone of uh ...of uh  Berlin; because otherwise we cannot go to the west.
But then again I recall how it was home  how I used to come to my mother  because we girls didnt attend synagogue like it -- Christians  or an American girls go.
And then soon enough the American Air Force finally came a nd bombed the IG Farben factor y. They didn't go inside.
We had a soldier  an American soldier came in and we were talking to him.
Black people are very exuberant and maybe some American dont like this and this can be a form of racism.
So  because between us  Polish people from the past  from the second World War  there is some differences between our Polish -- Polish American people in between  and Jewish people.
I had  because you see  at that time American immigration was based on quotas and the quotas depended on the pla -- on the country where you were born.
Well we didnt know what that meant; it was identification  American identification.
I came to th e conclusion on a Sunday that we were going to move out  having consulted with the American Embassy  who at that time were following up the French  who were making up their mi nds as to whether they wanted to get out of Paris or not and so on.
So I wanted to be an American so bad  and wanted to be part of  that for a whole while people never do.
They ask me  my colleague   he ask me  Felix  tell me  I'm American born  three or four generation.
And from there you try to get a ship to Shangha i. And I got on a ship to Portuguese and found out the ship landed on the various Po rtuguese possessions  one of them was Saint Tomay and so I went there to American Consul in Saint Tomay  asked for visa and they had numbers  they had quarter numbers for Jews in Sa int Tomay on the 39 island of Saint Tomay in the  in the Atlantic.
I'll never forget it was in Hanover  I think so  and there was black American and I told him that I only German.
The American forces buried him in a military cemetery in   Austria  and when we escaped from Hungary in 1946  our goal was to go to the American zone which we did.
One day my father receives a letter from the American embassy.
The American Army didn't have any more sympathy for the British Army than Britains had for Americans.
And slowly we registered in American Embassy  and here we met a little difficulty with one lady.
And they go to the English government  they go to the American government and nothing help that time  nothing USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0066 89help.
I helped the Brichah later on after I was ordered to Germany to American Army Headquarters in Frankfurt.
And...uh...because it's actually was an English zone....the American zone was...uh...not much to go by.
30 What did you  what do  what do you remember feeling or thinking when you saw that American  that first American soldier?
We will stop.ﬂ And  of course  what I did  I went into the American Consulate where they were very cooperative  let me put it that way  it was a very nice consul.
Soon after that I was ordered to England and since I was still the only free  that is non-assigned to a division  Jewish chaplain  I was ordered to the American Military Cemetery at Brookwood in Surry  not far from London  and I was uh stationed with the American detachment uh who took care of burials at their uh quarters in the town of Wilking .
Oh  he ma rried a no -- he married a lovely American girl whom I adore  Joan  and thats that.
The he felt that I knew enough about things  and so that he appointed me to be his leg-man  his messenger  if you wish it was more than a messenger  a messenger is an understatement to the American consulate  to answer the question  which basically amounted to  what s the status of my papers  and pos-possibility to get a visa to the United States   from every one of these people that wrote.
And I didn't see the advantage of being American  I mean I  see this is where the immigrants that came before really fouled  you know  but I'm resentful to this country for actually wanting my father to die.
I said  \ I can't answer this question to you.ﬂ \ Well  you are not an American.
The American headquarters in Frankfort would ca ll...the G.5 sections civil affairs  or Hiam...then called Hans Hoffman  later became Hiam Hoffman  later became   one of the fine people of Israel  and I had to do things.
She says   ﬁY ou're going to Washington  D.C. ﬂ So on the train they had The American Legion.
So thank God we came and my husband got an American doctor from Los Angeles  I was so happy.
When you came back to Stuttgart to get the American visa did you see a lot of damage from Kristallnacht or had it been cleaned up?
But I sent these German trucks up to Soldenburg   which was just beyond the American Occupied Zone of Germany and into the Russian Occupied Zone.
I know now that there was a vote taken involving the AAU  the Amateur Athletic Union  and the American Olympic Committee and that uh they voted to go.
And so I chose lung disease because lung disease is so much related to -- to an -- the environment  its related to smoking and I became very active in the American Lung Association and eventually served as -- as president of the American Lung Association  nationall y  and also received their Will Ross medal a few years ago  which is their highest volunteer honor.
I feel  in a sense  that a certain degree of justice has been done  not only to the victims of these perpetrators  but also in the process of immigration as an American   these people  by posing as displaced persons took a slot that might have gone to a person who was really in need  who was not fleeing prosecution  as opposed to persecution -- or who was fleeing prosecution  excuse me  rather than persecution.
Young American soldiers who didn't look young to me--they looked like kind of giants or angels--would come by and give me food  give me a bar of chocolate or share some food that they had.
In any case  we shot them down  and I had to go out on several occasions to pick up pieces of American flyers and hope that I c ould find a fingerprint or a bit of a finger to identify them  and the fireworks  of anti-aircra ft fire  may look very nice on Fourth-of-July  but I don't go to Fourth-of-July celebrations.
18 Telford Taylor (1908-)  American Chief of Counsel for War Crimes at Nuremberg.
The same day there was a knock on my door and a little woman walked in  in an American Red Cross uniform.
Because I wanted to be an American so bad  and I had all American friends  I really lost contact I knew a few people from Vienna  friends  you know  or people Interview with Fred Lorber December 8  2011 92I went to school with  but somehow I lost all contacts  because all my friends were American.
And the in -- we got married  and then  I think it was some oct October or November  when the letter from the American embassy came to my husband  that you are on the list of these people who are offered to settle.
Our convoy had stopped in Nuremberg  and at that time Nuremberg ha d a raid from the British and American af - air force.
Uh the day before  there was a lieutenant for the American government--uh the AMG  the American Military Government there.
we I went to American consulate  and over there we made something like birthdays Right.
Yes  in -- during the period in -- in the 60s  really  the American Society of International Law was very traditional  conservative if you will.
I'm American firs t and Jewish second  and I think anyone should be that way.
There wasn't an institution  the UNRHA wasn't there  the American Joint Distribution Committee wasn't there  no one was there.
And when they heard that you know my name they said  'Oh  you know  your husband and your father  they are both alive and they are in the American zone.'
The American nurses were sent to temporary duty elsewhere because the command of the hospital decided the work was too oner ous for American women to do.
Im American  Im modernized but in this respect  I dont want my pleasure I want my family to give .
My sister occasionally helped me a little  but I really did it by myself with a dictionary  and my father knew a little English and somehow and the American school was Interview with Riane Gruss March 1  1999 163unbelievable  they were so supportive  they really were.
What made our passage possible  in 1939 August 3rd  which was the last American ship that left the harbor  was the fact that in 1938 Interview with Susan Berlin March 7  2003 8Hitler gave this part of Slovakia to Hungary .
On the train...I shaved on the in the railroad stations and I living and sleeping on the train  back and forth every day seeing her in the hospital  and uh then finally when she was released from the hospital I got another job on the railroad tracks with through somebody th at I met  and in August of 1944 we were liberated by the Russian army in a town...because already at that time as you know  Russia and Germany were in at war  so liberated by the Russian army  and then uh in 1946...in 1945 '45 we escaped from Poland into the German zo...into the American zone in Germany in a Russian ambulance.
And we know it's soon it's going to be 27 over because the American planes were on our heads.
After liberation  Germany was divided in four zoning: American zone  English zone  Fr ench zone and Russian zone.
And a letter included that came from the Vatican  which I have a copy  a document  which it went to General Clay  which he was the governor of Europe from the American army  if you are going to kill those 45 people  you are not any better than the Nazis  because the war is over.
And in the States   I lived here about two years  I got Interview with Andre Zalc July 23  2009 36drafted in the American Army  you know  and they send me to Korea.
Well  you had to re-gain your strength a little bit  and because my friend found her brothers  they came to take her back to the American zone  they did talk us into going with them  thinking  oh maybe you still will find someone  you know?
But I didnt want to live among Ge rmans  and I wanted to finish my academic career  so and I didnt really like the American policy in general  which was to work very closely w ith the lower level German officials  which I didnt particularly like  although today I realize that if we had done what we did in Iraq  of dismissing the infrastructure of Saddam Hussein  we really didnt have the Interview with Joseph Eaton August 1  2010 89means to govern the country.
So General Clay went in and -- and promulgate d it in the American zone  and the Jewish organizations established in New York the first si -- Jewish successor organization called the Jewish Restitution Success Organization  or JRSO for short.
Oh  war is yeah  I was in uniform at that time  and we celebrated with the a with the Americans  and there was a huge American base close to us  or we were close to Interview with Anthony Chudzik January 24  2015 148 them.
And yet  you fly your flag  the American flag  and the POW flag every day from your home.
Most of them they went on the...on the west side  because they wanted to be behind American or English instead of the 29 Russian.
Even though it was a munitions factory  it was not bombed by American or Russian --?
You know  sometimes one side was was standing  30 just like in the American army  and they were putting more to push to Berlin because there there only was the ocean with twenty-two divisions and they knew they there's no way for them to escape  so it was dormant so there was no real fighting  and while I was not fighting  I was his adjutant.
Its not the American way  you know  where -- you know   the conversation between the father and the mother and the children is fairly free  at least in my family.
If you were an American and if ...we have never been occupied in America  but if the occupational -- yes we have been occ upiers.
There were some of his men who were caught in American uniforms  and they were shot.
Oh you we talk that i-if they can be alive another day or two  and we shouldnt they they they were a fraid to to eat too much  because the American in some places they didnt give them nothing  in some places they give them chocolate.
And an American dollar at that time was a lot of money.
Well  Kristallnacht  well  along with this well  we went to the hotel that we were staying at before we went to the American consulate in Stuttgart  this was in our hotel room  in other words since sinc e youre not an Aryan  youre expected to eat your meals in the room  you cant go into the Dining room.
They emptied out a few of th e blocks a few of the barracks they emptied out and they put in some of the prisoners in air he in case the American bombs bombers bombed that area  they blow up  were going to get blown up in it too.
Is means that they very much believed in  in pure American and anything which came from outside of America  like Ru ssia  and the Communists and so forth  was considered  you cannot live with it and you have to fight it.
Yes  it was a very significant moment that I wa -- became a citizen not in a big ceremony  I -- I was the only one  and it was an American female judge  and she was trying to be funny.
When we got to Italy  I happened to have been in the first unit of ten people who were sent over to Italy in preparation for going into Yugoslavia  and Teeter was approached by the British American armies.
Got a hold of the UNRRA  which sent me huge cans of soup and bread and they finally fixed the locomotive  and as the train pulled out I wished at that moment that every [American] Jew could have been with me as these Jews  American Jews who made all this possible  as they waved  thanking me.
He gets an americ -- an American uniform  you know [indecipherable] troops  and then when he was transferred out to Avignon.
But because Dora has this marvelous faculty with language  she is on a train and there's some American  Englishmen and others talking in English.
My mothers name was Irene Kohn  K-O-H-N which translated to American Cohen  C-O-HE-N  but hers was K-O-H-N. And my father was Hugo Wellisch.
An American would come in and ask him where do you live  he would say Ochyo.
Exactly  Karl May  and -- and the -- the image in my mind was always of this proud  courageous American Indian  of course  the Ap ache.
Applause] Al has been a frequent spokesman for the American Lung Association since 1974 and served as President from 1993 -94.
Well  American people have haters  like a ll other countries of the world.
Now everything is consolidated in what is called the American Center for Labor Solidarity  still exists in 2007  at that time Africa -- and I was [indecipherable] ideal man  because I was involved in Africa and North Africa specially and they needed a director for the French speaking area.
So the tricky was for me and few other my frie nd of mine  hiding and stay as long as possible in the camp because the American 3r d Army was so close already.
But we had to -- I-I remember it now  it where the leader brought us in from Graz to the American zone and we reached Feldafing.
I was following  yes  but I didn't understand American justice then  th e American way of life  and I just  I just felt they should be just string up  but that is not the way it is  but at that time I had different kind  I had no idea about justice  you know  because when I left Poland we have different kinds of laws and regulations  different kind of way of justice.
>> Michel Margosis: The American organization offered to help children under 16 to save them out of Europe.
They had immediately 50 been taken into custody of an American colonel  no one had gotten near those files.
Well  Jan Karski was was actually he was a famous American hero  and Polish hero.
And the internationa l lawyers who were dealing with it  including the American and Japanese  who were then on our side  felt that -- well  all right  in order not to have retroactive justice  they will not try him for the crime of aggression  because it had never been declared to be an international crime.
This this guy was actually Philby was the secret agent allowed to to have a ccess to th-the top secrets of American state.
I was so shocked when th ey read that to me and asked me if I want to go  and I said absolu tely not  Im an American and I want to stay here and I want to train here and I want to stay in the American army.
It its mindboggling how much was published  translated and publi all there were I read already there  when the time of 15  I had read the American classics.
I wanted to speak English like an -- like an American  not like -- not like Mr. Kissinger who  after 60 years  still cant speak proper English  although hes -- he is probably th -- one of the brightest people  an d one of the people I respect very  very much.
Didnt even know there was a German ship til I read your things from the Holocaust Mu -- cause Saint Louis  you know  you think its an American ship.
About 200 letters a day were coming in from the States because the American operations  as I mentioned earlier  were very efficient  and there was nobody working.
Uh  he took us for ice cream to the American P.X.  you know; and that's where I got first candy bar  first movie  ice cream.
In the end when we -- in the end when we crossed the American lines  the Jeep -- we had 18 people on the Jeep.
No  I dont feel like a refugee and I dont feel 100% American.
Two nutritioni sts we had an American nutritionist and one on the Unrah team.
I knew that if they would be alive  I would have...they would have found me or something  but I knew that my brother's in Israel  that he probably is either in Israel or hiding somewhere else and the American Red Cross found out that he was fighting with the Jewish Brigade in Belgium and it took him a while to find me because he couldn't get away.
My Dad  keeping in mind your possible interest in our integration in American life  that this was also the period of the o utbreak of the Spanish Civil War.
So they called up the American Wholesale where Mr. Wolfe is.
When I came to Vienna  and first I met with General Mark Clark who was the American general in command of Austria.
Later we found out that we were walking between the American and the Russian front.
They had no idea what was going on in England  but they had just heard that the American soldiers were marrying all of the English women and that was a terrible thing for them to have to hear  and we were happy to tell them not so.
I said an American officer mustn't show his weakness in front of the culprit.
Q2: So so he he left from the British [indecipherable] American  so thats thats an interesting [indecipherable] He had a he had a title in England .
I said  I want every one of these American -- these German soldiers to bring all their pay  all their p -- clothing  which they dont need all the time  and even if they need  and put them in the middle of that town so these people can eat -- they can live with it.
We knew in Poviac which was the most wholesome prison in Warsaw that they had some Jewish families that had American --.
I could have told him the differenc e between German indu stry and American industry because German industry was his enthus iastic partner for a decade before he ever started his wars  whereas in th e United States  even after Pear l Harbor  Franklin Roosevelt had to bribe our businesses to convert to war production by way of tax breaks and tax incentives.
And he gave me a ch ance just try for a scholarship in a very good American college in Swarthmore  which has helped me for the rest of my life.
They felt much more comfortable if they would have fallen into the French  British  or American they their desire was to to be in the American hands  but unfortunately for them  and fortunate ly and unfortunately for some Russians also as you know  Eisenhower stopped to the Elbe   and he gave orders just to stop there  not to go ahead.
And that's who we traveled with from Loge to the American zone.
And that moment  say  for example  this was a document that I could show to the Germans  yes  that I am loyal to them  Im working for the fire department  which is a -- I dont want to use this America -- American expression  a work [indecipherable] for -- my work was [indecipherable] but it was working  by even this was not working so good  because this German who a issue as this special document  they said  ﬁBut if you will be in the wapanka ﬂ you know  in this stoppage and selection  ﬁin the very beginning  dont show to the authorities  because could happen ﬂ [makes tearing sound] ﬁand you are nothing.
We stayed in Berlin for about six months and we were in Berlin we tried to get to the American side because we were told it was best from the Russian side with the Russians  eventually  like with cars  trucks  trains until we got from Poland to Berlin we did a lot of traveling.
American immigrations laws were strict and permitted for very small numbers to come from the lands of Eastern Europe.
With the help of the American Joint Committee we getting a stipend to pay for our tuition.
And as you recall there was a depression in the United States in 1936 and the American counsel had like 17 visas to grant for the whole country.
When I was in Italy and through the American soldier from New York -- he wrote to his parents in New York and his parents with that letter came to my father and my father wrote the letter and through his parents sent it back to him in Italy and through the military mail I got the news from Father and he wrote me that Mama and Sister is in Siberia.
And  the only thing  there were even American ----- -------- all over  and I was teaching English to the young lady who today is Congressman Lantesher's wife  and she looked like Shirley Temple  and we used to walk on the street with our hats up and talking English.
For a very long time  at least to me it seemed very long  he didn't answer me  and then his own voice betrayed his emotion  he was wearing dark glasses I couldn't see his eyes  he said  \ So am I.\  And the impact of that to be liberated not only by an American  but by a fellow Jew  um  it  it  it just  so totally uh  I mean  um  I think this is when that that feeling of such an incredible joy which fills your  your whole  whole being.
I dont remember any more  but I know Had the museum opened when you sought [indecipherable] Yes  oh even when the first efforts at the museum at the organiza ororganizing the museum took pl ace  I was  as you can tell from the interview in 1990 first of all  I donated a number of bo oks and pamphlets and materials to the museum  because when I was handling the American claims for property lost in Poland  when I was working for the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission  and when I was stationed in Warsaw   I managed to reach the people  the survivors who Interview with Wallace Witkowski September 1  1998 28are running the Jewish Historical Institute in Warsaw.
You were on the train when you saw the American planes coming.
Did you have any special emotions when you stepped on to American soil?
And then -- and I took that examination and when I passed I transferred to Worcester Polytechnic  which wa s sort of a college  but again the exams were external University of London exams  and I was preparing for part two  and I was going through it pretty quickly so that by 1949  when I was 24  I was ready to take the Bachelors degree exam  but then my visa arrived from the United States   and the American consul would not renew it.
Then he told me that if you go to Munich  Congress passed a law  he told me the American government -- I didnt know the difference between Congress and no Congress that so me displaced person they can register with the Joint.
So we -- we organized it  and we had to be equipped  and then later the American government didnt allow it.
All I know is that we had the money that we had to put down in Breslau to the American consulate and vouch that we would never be a burden to any government.
I now was living with the rich uncle in America and his American wife and going to school in Forest Hills  Long Island  P.S.3.
The first thing when I got up  I went outside a little bit  I saw the American soldiers in there  and I was told thats General Patton over there.
But suddenly in ‚47  one could not see a single American western movie in town or an important Western magazine.
The British have closed Camp Litwinski  near Tel Aviv   a recreational facility for American sailors and soldiers  and ask all Americans to leave.
So one day  I I became friendly also with the chief of police  and I told him I I say  Im involved in in this type of activities where sometimes I have to go from one sector now that Berlin is divided four sector; the French  the British  the Russian  and the and the American.
We had a few Americans on the blacklist  some American nationals living in Vichy France... France were suspected of dealing with the Germans  and we blacklisted American nationals.
Do you remember what you were feeling at the time when you were just not another American soldier.
And from early in the morning till 10 o'clock at night  she handed out donuts and coffee and talked and chatted with American soldiers.
I remember some American jazz  which was not permitted  but fo r five dollars you could have a copy made on a wax platter.
Later they brought a group of American soldiers and I spoke with them  and I said to th em  \ My dream is to go to Americ a. I want you to do something for me.\
The women of Hiroshima who had been injured by American blasts  atomic weapons  and who had been disfigured and who were brought to New York where they were treated by Doctor Hitzik  a Jewish doctor  at Mt. Sinai Hospital and given all kinds of plastic surgery and restored as far as possible as a gesture of goodwill from the American public to the Japanese.
Well  how -- to take the American army  the air force  and to destroy Serbia?
He went to the American headquarters and by coincidence the captain there in charge happened to be a Jewish boy from New York.
So we went from the Russian zone  into the American or the British zone.
And also  very quickly  the bombing started  and that made them extremely angry  that the Americans started to bomb us  and the American and British bomb that went all the way down to the basement.
And thats how we got out  and what happened was  in Germany the American consulate of course had a quota  so we got a number  just like you go to the delicatessen Right.
Here are the guys sitting in a room with thei r collars open  feet on the desk and American headquarters.
In 1933 th ey left the rest of the family  my grandparents and left Litic and they immigrated to America where some of their boys already had gotten  became very American patriotic  you know they served  the boys  in the second World War  the army  the navy and so on.
So its just a -- a s -- German soldiers fire at American soldiers  just that.
And -- by the way  her husband  who is a fifth generation American  he s more -- more involved -- not involved  but hes more for the remembrance of the Holocaust than -- than she is.
Their interests were different  the -- but then  I belonged to the European society  I didnt quite belong to the American society  not at that time.
And American society  even though I came here with a pronounced British accent  I went to high school  and people would say to me  talk British to me.
Interview with Erica Laufer 38 August 19  2012 Yeah  since she had this stomach condition and needed medicine and kept ranting and railing that American doctors are far behin d  she would send to her relatives in Switzerland soap and perfumes and candies and what not.
We had a ball  all the oranges we want to eat and had a couple of -- I had an Italian cook  an American cook  Italian.
He I think Leo was in tou he was in the American army  Leo was in French army  so I I dont know where they met or where they got contact.
Yes  yes  yes  he was he was a an American German American or American German  whatever.
I knew  you know -- well  anyway  it doesnt matter  but you know  just -- just American songs  from s -- from sea to shining sea and whatever they were.
And it was a debate at that time whether I shouldn't be let go to Vilna  so in Vilna I could meet up with the American Counsel  I can perhaps go to the United States.
So  when an Italian American left an position  exactly Italian American took that same position.
And every weekend they would -- all the Zionists would meet there  but on weekends they would give it to us and we brought together all the Israelis and all the American Jewish students  and we sang  we danced  we ate  we fraternized.
And  uh  so I first had a...I worked with the um...uh  American company there  telegraph company  and I learned to type blind; and at that time uh there was a girl  and she said to me  \ You must come to...I  I'm dance...I do a little bit dancing  and we have a performance in in the theater in Amsterdam.
American Jewish Committee  you know  they -- they fight bigotry  anti-Semitism  racism  all that.
The three friends that I have from when I was 10 years old were all American born and their parents were American born  so no  they -- they didnt experience the particular childhood that I did.
>> Frank Liebermann: But it didn't really become an American agenda I would say until when was it  `70s  `80s?
So  we went --we came out to the road where the American side was which was good.
Then when I had an apartment to get in  so s there I work I didnt want to stay by my brother  because the sister-in-law wasnt so well  she was an American  she had a di fferent view and everything  and and I saw that I am not welcome  so I said  I want right away an apartment.
And that was confirmed to me when I was dating American Jewish girls.
Interview with Wallace Witkowski September 1  1998 7 I turned 21  you may recall from the in terview  I managed to arrive in the United States three days before my birthday  my 21 st birthday  on which the then American immigration law would cut me off as a mi nor child of an American citizen and would make me wait for a number of years before I could get under a Polish quota.
And the American army was really very helpful to the disp laced persons.
Of course I got my green card and then when I got married  I turned American right away.
At first  they were very  rather shy  the Russians  and not as talkative as our American officers  but later on there was quite a symbiotic relationship that developed between the two.
She...they all decided  most of them decided they were going to go to Yokohama  to the American cons ul; because the American consul in Kobe was not a very sympathetic man.
His brother-in-law was a Director of American Joint in Warsaw  prior to the war.
I remember a nice American lady that took good care of us.
So  in Belgium  I really didn't have a job for work and there was that store where they sold blankets and suits from the military  the American  it wa s very heavy beds  hard job.
And my cousin  th eir son  was in the American ar my.
People instead of getting American soldiers went in and got ahold of the goods of German armies.
And she had a boyfriend  and married an American soldier that was in -- in Ge rmany.
The American Consul from Munich called me and said somebody in Panama is looking for you.
Do you remember what you talked about with some of these young American soldiers?
Even though we thought  again  him being an American  he will survive.
We would listen to the the American broadcasts and uh somehow the rest of my family one by one found out that we were in the Swedish house  my mother and I  and my cousins kept coming and since my mother told them since she had the it belonged to the whole family  so she managed to have all my cousins come and stay with us in the Swedish house and I think she paid somebody off because my grandmother appeared on the scene who was at that time in her late seventies  and somehow somebody brought my grandmother over.
Anyway  so in Bamberg I had to report to the C.I.C as per my release  I have to be entrusted to American or British au thority for reeducation.
What was the passage of time between when the camp was first entered by the American soldiers and you got to go in?
SWB: JOHN KOMSKI: From eh..cough.. The reason one of the reasons why we had to move out from Dachau was that the American authorities were planning to bring to Dachau all the Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
>> Agi Geva: The American soldiers liberated us  we are going shopping and everybody can ask for something among the 30 women who were there.
And then the boys are five and three  so theyre -- theyre not -- Now is -- is Flo American?
And when we were married  the French did not like at all officially the idea that a French woman would marry an American  not done.
Insdg And it's about the nazification  and it has a love story woven in and out of it  but  you know  it's about an American who falls in love with a German woman and the German woman has two brothers  one of whom was in the -- notorious Nazi and the -- and one -- one died  and the one who was the Nazi takes on the identity of the one who died and tries to pass as the one who died and so there is this intrigue about who -- which -- which brother is this -- Uh-huh. --
Before we come  we stay in a -- in a -- in a -- we was waiting for -- for visa and -- and the American  they teach us -- they tell us  you know  what is that -- what kind of a life we re gonna have in a -- America.
And one day  she had a meeting -- parlor meet ing  and General Levine  who was a Jewish doc -- man  who was a general during the wa r  and he was with the army  American army  and he was with one of the units that liberated one of the -- I dont remember  Auschwitz  or Buchenwald  one of the concentration camps.
What was the first thing you said to the American soldiers when they liberated you?
And of course in those days  Bronx Science was heavily Interview with Harry Gelb December 13  2001 21Jewish as a general matter  whether that be American Jews or Jews from other parts of the world  and not necessarily Holocaust survivors  per se.
We lived in Munich and we read the American papers and one day I just happened to see there was a story that Dr. Esele  the secretary of the Board of Regents of the State of New York had been arrested for selling licenses.
My request came through the American representative  Frank Howley  who is generally known as a man who wanted to go to war against the Russians.
And there we were sitting  and evening American soldiers came to visit us.
And even though I was only 12 years old and my brother were 13  he recruited one of the Jewish chaplains fr chaplains from his American company in the army and we were officially Bar Mitzvah  went through all the various prayers.
It was at the time when the luminaries of the American Academy were still at Columbia.
I remember there was talk about an American soldier that was helped and hid.
Paris [indecipherable] the only interesting thing I did in Paris  was when there was information on being phony American dollars printed in Marseilles.
When we got in there  on the stage was a big American flag  and they had a a big fan in back of that flag  and it was just a 28 flopping  and they were playing the national anthem.
We never ta lked about it  so not -- so to get used to the American life  to assimilate here and not what we lost.
I dont remember -- I -- I know that I so desperately wanted only to be an American  that I tried very hard.
When we went to Barre  during the war Barre was the airport for the Allied forces and it was the most colorful thing you have ever seen and it was really a British military  American  Greek  whoever was with the Allied forces.
And I do that  so I I feel  you know  I Im paying I think paying my my my what my fuf to be able to have lived here  to be able to have been part of this American milieu.
We were trying to convince the people because it is an American tradition that you work in your own community.
And then we started to feel that it's getting closer and closer  and in fact my father went to the American Consulate in Prague  that was in 1938  to get some visa because he had distant relatives in Chicago who supplied affidavits for us to come out.
When I got out since I had some electrical background  I joined a company called American Company and they were dealing with television installations.
I also told you that I had a brother who was in the American army and was killed in the Battle of the Bulge.
An d then when I came after the war  that woman and that man that were with th e American who saved himself and worked underground  they say they had moved shortly after my parents were taken away.
When I say we  I was very brazen  I must confess  and I established a precedent case showing how this man I wont give you his name  he lives in the States today how this man had lost family  had lost his home  had come back  had no where to live  was being housed by the American voluntary agency  and essentially he was still a displaced person  and we won the case.
The American -- I cant remember what happened  but I know there was fors and againsts.
My father had ra -- come here  as I said  working in the steel mills and when the war broke out and -- first World War  he volunteered to go and he was in the American expeditionary force  and when the war was over he automatically became a citizen.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0066 28 But before you reached Dachau actually  you were liberated by the American army  by Pattons third army  actually.
And in that list  which a soldier had on him  the soldier had the lis t of these people  an American soldier  I believe  and he gave it to the Aufbau  the Aufbau publis hed it.
Matter of f act  American used to dress differently  you know.
He said President Truman in December of 1945  on the 22nd of December  had passed had issued a directive which enabled people who were displaced persons to get priority for American visas under the quota system.
The American high schools are a wonderful laboratory of democracy in so many ways.
It was a lottery system and and when he and when they wound up in Holland  my father said you know  Im going to contact the American embassy in Stuttgart and we will have our files transferred to Rotterdam.
And it was [indecipherable] How did you know that onc e the American what did America mean to you?
The American consulate will try to get you some pa pers to reach America.
And then I come across American Jewish people  ﬁOh  we didnt know what went on.ﬂ ﬁYou didnt know what went on  when it was daily in the newspapers?
24 American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee 17 03:18:14 So  I have to do something.
16 We have the same -- and I feel this -- I wa s raise in the same feeling  who because you must know and I am sure you know  the Polish Cons titution was the second in the world after American Constitution  and it is the same C onstitution  freedom from everyth -- everybody.
And I was waving goodbye to them because they were marrying American soldiers.
He learned English very quickly and spoke English wit h my mother who was American born.
Its mostly German and mostly German news about the U-boats sinking  about the American convoys  and so on; the big successes of the German army.
I was aware of the American Jewish committee and their ambivalence about being too supportive of the Zionists  because after all  we Jews are religion rather than a nationality  and I was very much identified with the idea that Jews are both a religion and a nationality.
B ut what it got m e Š all the – the thing after the war I heard – no American bombers Š they knowed the intelligence Š couldnt bomb Auschwitz.
And actually  it was American G.I.s Jewish  just spoke Jewish and ask us [indecipherable] but were put in rooms.
And so slowly  slowly I started getting -- and with American kids saw that Im European.
I remember General Haan to this day and by coincidence  my husband was on the General Haan when he was drafted into the army and he was not sent to Korea  but instead he was sent to Germany  and he spoke German  so he had some very interesting conversation in bars with some Germans as a young Jewish American soldier.
R: I was even in the American Army  woul d you believe.
And so Id seen  you know  American movies and all that.
As it turned out  very cold and hardly heated in winter in order to break our spirit so that we would go to Poland  help solve the refugee problem for the American authorities and diplomatically help the We stern allies who had millions of refugees on their hands in Germany further pressured by the Germans themselves who were telling them how can we rebuild our country with millions of refugees who don't want to go home.
So I don't want to be misunderstood about the American Jewish Committee only or specifically.
They didnt know American standards and things  so I had to show them everything  and I helped them  a lot of them.
And the American government finally cabled to various other steamship agencies  tried to prevent more Jews from going to Shanghai.
How did you feel wh en you first put your foot down on American soil?
And he had two rooms  the American Ambassador had two rooms in this hotel.
I woke up to the realization that postwar Germans who were born after Hitler  were as guilty of the Holocaust cruelties  as I was guilty of the native American holocaust that occurred 100 years ago  right here in California   a bounty on their scalps.
So tell me about this document  when did y -- how did you -- This document helped me to get from the Polis h -- through the Polish zone  to the -- it was the Russian zone  and then into the American zone.
What does it mean to you to be an American citizen?
So I -- and those were mostly American who -- I said  you have here your family  your fathers  your mothers  yo ur children are here  your grandchildren are here.
The then we heard  when the Poles landed in Holland  you know the Polish parachuters  whole brigade and couple American brigades landed in Holland  we heard those rumors and it was the gospel truth of course  you could not I mean  if you said  ﬁNo  its not true ﬂ somebody could kill you  probably.
Perhaps to dispose of -- because the people were still dying  you know  and -- and the good American soldiers gave them chocolate and so on  which was -- it was tota lly uncontrolled at that time.
I went to the meeting  now everybody in mostly Mosul they had people who belonged to this th at were veterans  who came back from -- American veterans  who didnt have what to do.
He organized this way  so on the night of May the 7th  to 9  to 9  to May the 8th  we disarmed 12 o clock at night all the soldiers  and we put them in the cellar  and we kept them till the Russians came in on the 11th of May  we were protecting the camp ourselves  we put our own people on the towers  and we kept the guard the inmate  and we closed the camp because we were surrounded with over 100 000 German sold-soldiers around because they were be tween the American  French and English troops on the West Side  and the Russian troop on the East side  and we were just in the center of the whole mess  and we put a big sign  \ Typhus inside \  so nobody could enter because the Germans were afraid that the typhus could be spread  and we put -----------because nobody---  and they lib--we were liberated by ourselves  but officially on May 11  the first Russian soldiers entered the camp.
By the way  there were a number of American Army Jewish chaplains who helped the Brichah in similar fashion.
Also  by reputation Von Schirach had an American Mother and I think maybe the court thought he was more believable than if he didn't have any American blood.
So this may be also  just as I'm talking to you  why somewhere I' m more American  because this is -- was my free choice.
I mean American down in their property  that was going to become a Panzer tank unit as soon as the games were over.
And I am a little bit upset maybe  cause Karski was in the west  and not he lp -- help  and not support ne -- from American government and from Jewish government -- for Je wish  I am not [indecipherable]  in Jewish.
Can you describe what the scene was like at the American consulate in Marseille?
this was just counsel and then eventually counsel general  but I was the only American for four big countries at that point.
And I have made a policy -- or I mean  I dont know if its because of my experiences but when we go overseas or when we go anyplace  a lot of Americans live in an American ghetto.
And so within a few months he arranged my conversion into a green card American citizen.
Because at that time we all ran into the woods because we didn't want to even want American planes to hit us.
And we would go pretty often to not I  but mo m and dad to the American embassy to find out where we were on that list.
And it was an American soldier in fact  I think it was that Lieutenant Nowalski that picked us up from Luneburg  took us back to Berlin and it was again  that must have been in late August  b ecause September seventh we left Bremerhaven on the SS Marine Marlin  that was the ship  and went to New York.
But you know  step by step  that became quite clear  and certainly the -- but the -- the American films on the concentration camps  Bergen-Belsen and so on  were more known than the Holocaust  because the Holocaust was far away  you know  and the myth I think persevered  that -- that this was nothing that the German people was related to  and it took us  as historians many  many -- and you as many years to get that into the [indecipherable] where the Holocaust was not  if I went -- done by -- performed by Himmler and his chieftain.
If a rich American came and gave me a big bag of Polen kaffee  I would let him sleep with Rita.ﬂ So  a good German can sell you anything you want to  if you pay enough.
Tell us a little bit about Stephen Wise  his school  what was his role in this  what was his role in the American Jewish Community at that time?
So I think Henry befriended a few - I think Henry may have had two friends who were American.
Again and again he sent papers  I mean  he to to the American consulate.
But at the time of the depression  when America  you know  after the crash and when Europe was attracted by the American depr ession  which was 1933 or whatever  I dont remember in Poland at the time  Fathers se rvices were not needed anymore due to the fact that neither Germany nor England could afford to come and purchase timber in Poland because they themselves  you know  they had to make do with whatever they had  and utilize what they had.
She went to the same school I did  to American college  but she was in one or two cl asses younger than I was.
I wanted my children to be American  after a ll  they are my roots in this country.
He had gone to Boston to speak to 2 an American Bar Association meeting.
By then I was an American citizen and I could sponsor her  although I wasn't living there  here.
Just the fact that you survived and that you feel this course we all knew Americas gonna win anyhow  so yeah  especially with Gisela you know  who was saying me Im telling you  once the American comes come  the war is over.
I was with friends  and I was already well rooted  and well established  and feeling -- feeling American  that -- and I came  and I have seen what I have seen.
And that fact was brough t to my attention by the chaplain  and one sergeant in the American army  in that Jewish committee.
And there was a lot of smuggle  with the cooperation of the American army.
Other church leaders may have been a little upset at Trifas posi -- Trifa being who he was  and what that was doing to the reputation of the rom -- Romanian American church  but I dont know that.
It was interminable  because every event like for instance uh well  in our case it was the...it was the attack of Russia by the Nazis  where we believed that will be the end of Germany  but later on in Germany when we learned about the invasion of Europe by the Allies  by the American and British armies  we always believed now it's the end.
It's one thing to know and it is one thing to -- to have to be raised by -- by the parents of Holocaust survivors  that went -- saw so much  it's somehow  it gets to -- to your children because in many ways we couldn't do the same thing as the American parents did.
And in those days  American boys still -- still felt very -- this was before the 60s -- strongly about doing for the country that was asked of them.
Uh  they redirected us because they thought the American tank column was going to cut us off before they get to the tunnels.
