Every-everybody knew me because  you 10 Civil marriage ceremony (German) 17 know  they knew my family.
He lived with us and he sort of became like a protector of the family because he was involved in the  in the I don't really the administration of the ghetto.
So here you have  you know  a very happy occasion in a family in Holland  where my parents felt very  very safe  had made many  many friends  most of them not Jewish.
And Im just wondering if theres anything that you have learned about your family  or anything that youve come to understand or realize since you did that interview that youd like to add?
Before we talk about the war years and the Holocaust and what it meant for you  let's begin with you telling us a bit about your family and your community before the war began.
But we have four children  and its after the four parents.
The family took me out  and they -- volun teered to say.
I think my healing came from my family  from my husband and my son.
His parents knew me and I was in their house and you know  it was a very familiar relationship.
I have another sister that was -- there were four girls  she was with a 2 -year -old boy with her husband.
And I opened it to the Ss and went to Stein and there was my mother and my father and the rest of the family.
Well after my mother passed away  I was taken to my aunt and uncle.
And the eveni ng -- and we were the only Jews there  no other Jewish family at all.
So  in other words  they couldnt have been part of the Warsaw ghetto.
My aunt  my uncle  my aunt's mother  and their two sons.
My mother was very religious  but my father wa s not religious at all.
And I was  thanks God  most healthy child in that family.
I wasnt -- I come from a very Orthodox  ultra-Orthodox home.
You went back to Antwerp and your father was called to work so your family left Antwerp and suddenly went to Brussels in 1941.
My father and mother we re both German and had their parents still in Germany.
If it was your house  and you left it  was it that it was confiscated from you  or you so your family sold it?
All the other families I lived with -- Were not Jewish. --
And as I say  the the second family was totally different.
And then so this was quite a shock to my parents.
I didn't realize at that time that that chicken saved my life and as I came out  I noticed a friend of mine  by the name of Jack--Jean-- Ginsburg from Belgiu m and I said  ﬁDo you know  by any chance  where my family is?ﬂ He says  ﬁYes  I know  because I helped them move.ﬂ He was sort of--at that time he was dating my sister so he knew and he was a boy that I went to school with in Antwerp  Jean Ginsburg.
>> Bill Benson: When your father was taken away for forced labor  do you know where he went and what he did?
And this is really an -- I -- tha-that's how I -- anyway  I went back and when I came -- but it didn't work out very well with that family  because they would take for instance  the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0012 67 children to the movies  they would leave him alone.
I could have gotten  probably  a great deal of money that way  because of what happened to my family in World War II  and all this  but I never had  for a second  a thought.
Tell us what you can  what you've been able to learn  a bout the circumstance that caused you to be away from your family at that time and what happened once the Germans came into Yugoslavia.
Some of them have migrated  you know  to Chile but I still have family there.
Are there a ny particular messages you would like to give them about family values?
Got diverted because of some family illness and wound up back here.
And had you all said this to each other  as a family  that well go back -- Never said it  never said it.
One day  he comes home from one of his sudden trips an d he brings some very sp ecial food and the lady wraps it up on a tray and she says to me to go to that neighbor  to bring a present from the El-hades family.
I have to first say that my father  like many oth er German Jews  considered themselves Germans  period.
Yeah  the feeling was that to get back to my family.
And God knows that the f -- the entire course of your family history would have been changed.
When you were growing up  did you live in a Jewish neighborhood?
Because the  a neighbor had said  who was friendly with a Soviet soldier  that he had told her that this night they are going to come for the whole family  after they had taken my father away.
Well  my family  uh  was...I had  uh...two brot hers and a sister.
As much as I can remember  she was a very good person and very devoted to everybody and so was my father.
>> Bill Benson: When you got back to Paris  August 1944  the war itself would go on for -- until May 1945.
And of course thats didnt come until about three years ago  when I was doing a a study on on in the museum in the Holocaust museum  and I was talking to the then head of archives  in a casual conversation  and you know  mentioning th at I had who I was and that family was was taken to deported to from Vienna to to Lodz and thats when I lost the trail.
I dont know why I said I was Jewish and they said youre Jewish.
There was no way how to make any attempt to get out the family of Lithuania.
For example  one family that were v -- we were very  very close with was a family that lived -- called Ravensbergan.
And she was happy that I did that for her  and I was happy to have her.
>> Bill Benson: Frank  during that time with your father having lost his liveliho od  he's no longer able to practice  how did the family make ends meet at that time?
Because my parents were busy then  and So but lets go back to the Jehovahs Witness family that was your also in Schreiersgrun .
The whole camp stunk and was dirty and was full of decay  and uh   typhus  and this is how Christian got sick and got the typhus and got delirious  and uh  one night she was so delirious she uh saw her parents in front of her eyes  and she jumped up from the ground because we were sleepi ng on the bare floors  and she saw her family and she started running to her family she thought   and she only was stepping on the sleeping people and made a whole big commotion  and I naturally tried to calm her down  and uh  while I was trying to calm her down  the uh  the woman in charge of the barrack came and with a stick started beating on me because I was making a commotion  we were not supposed to be speaking  it was supposed to be quiet at night  and she hit me so hard until the um stick was broken  and naturally I couldn't budge for 2 days.
When you worked in child development and family relations  what was your concentration or was there a sort of a something that especially you [talkover] Yeah.
And were there other family did you move into another house  or an apartment? ‚
We walk to the synagogue there  and the womens were sitting upstairs and we were sitting downstairs and we was pray ing  you know  and and Were you a religious family?
I was stronger than she was  although 10 years younger  and I believe now  Ive believed for a long time  for the sake of family union  it was never told to me that she was my half sister.
Because the Jewish people in this time in the partisan  what they thought was they were very valuable  you know  when they fighting  because the worse -- worse -- if somebody -- fighter was the worse if he have family.
So in some ways  all of this fell to your mother.
Did you have any extended family that were cl-close to you in Baden-Baden?
And -- but I was told  and my brother  the family -- those years in Feldafing and in the other camps  a lot of them you cou -- you were free to go out and you come in in the camp .
And we got some money  well not the big money  a thousand  each of us.
>> Bill Benson: Did you have a large  exten ded family?
Uh it wasn't wasn't bad exactly but it was totally lacking in in empathy  sympat hy  real human sympathy and real love for the uh refugee children because I wasn't the only refugee child there that I was five years with that family  four years with that family and uh but anyway it was a new life.
When they were that same age that you were  did it bring back memories of what you were doing when you were their age  the hard life that you had in I dont think that they are thinking about that because I  in my family I actually told very few Interview with Hans Ziegler 40 December 21  2012 things about my former life  about the Holocaust and about the  about my experience in the camp in Berlin and the camp in Postelberg.
>> In learning a lot about Polish history or during this time  there's a lot that I have read about that Pols would look for opportunities to take from the Jews  wouldn't always help out the Jews  maybe were glad to see the Jews go.
You mentioned this family in your first in terview  and -- and you also mentioned that they had -- they had disappoint ed you and your family by rea lly not -- by asking for more and more money when they were hi ding  and -- and behaving somewhat -- Right. --
So my adjustment was that I just wanted to have peace and raise a family.
My family  we obscured one room by putting a wardrobe in front of the door.
Not fo rget now  the German sold ier still have a family and children and this.
Uh  Paul  would you tell me about your parents and your family  your family life as a young child?
So what happened next when you -- when you were then deported?
Before we turn to that time of the war  tell us a little bit about your life  your family  your community in the years before the war.
Our family was very small  me and a sister  [her name] ------  and I was six years old I had to go to the Hebrew ------  the kindergarten  and I went to the it for 12 years.
When you smell -- when -- you said you t ook drives out in the country with your family and you smelled the -- the stables  what feeling did that evoke?
They weren't married  they had no family  only three of them.
>> Bill Benson: Your mother was taken in July of 1942.
My grandparents -- my father's parents and many of his sisters and brothers  except one  they lived in Poland.
Because I was so very lonely and so unhappy  one day they told me that not far from them is another Jewish family hidden; and  I want to go and visit them.
I was in hiding and it makes m feel very badly that I still had to act this out and it happened at the same time as my parents decided to go back to Europe and again it was a kind of a split with my family  a separation.
Then there was a discussion about why should we accept funds from the American -- 43 from the allies  in the conduct of the underground in Italy  to assist prisoner  family  as well as assist the partisan.
He had one of his people who used to be charge daffair of Hungary in Kaunas  Mr. Browdig  of a very rich family  and he was give n the work as a -- like a minister of foreign country.
The original Hungarian territory was all -- what they call the -- the Hungarian historical land was lost roughly two thirds of them was lost to Romania  the Czech -- Czechoslovakia Republic  Serbia  Croatia  and so forth.
Interview with Yehuda Adam 6 Well  especially during the my years in Jewish elementary school  we did.
01:03:52 2 Uh we...our family was not Jewish but we were nevertheless uh uh always in danger anyway.
And this was the easiest thing  cause of the German decided that Vidamma wi -- will be the ghetto  and this actually where all Jews  including my family  lived.
Can you  can you describe for us briefly  what happened to you wh en liberation came?
In the end he started pushing us  asking if there was some Jewish person in our family.
So he said  ﬁD-Don't worry  I have a good trade and I will get a job ﬂ and -- and he was trying  you know  to do his best to cheer me up  but then th-th-these -- these -- his children came and I had such -- I mean I never had felt any more animosity than -- than for this family  who could treat us so shabbily.
Your father  you told me  was involved in the Jewish community?
Did you have quite a bit of relatives  cousins  aunts  uncles  grandparents?
They too family thought that my father was very bright  and they send him to school.
I  I think th at I am happy  and I think  my family is proud of their father and myself.
I dont know in the larger community because tha-that type of discussions were kind of inside of the family .
When I brought my family over to Kafkaz it was late in the day and I had to go back to Slobonov where I was assigned.
She wants to go to Israel and settle there  her husband  too.
Do you think it -- it made a big difference  it he lped that -- that your family did have some of the financial resources from -- from the earlier da ys?
They had a little girl my age  and it was a husband  a wife  a mother  father  little girl.
They went to Canada; they emigrated with the whole family to Toronto  in Canada.
In order to get the the birthdays  the birthdays of of the members of my family  I cant I dont know when they died  bu t they perished in the Holocaust.
She always cried about her family  and I remember something that I did that to this day I find very hard to explain why I did it.
Did your mother have help at home  hired from the outside?
And here I came across this pious man  my great uncle was sitting on the ground with his whole family and they called alphabetically.
I should say that my family was in those days an orthodox family  the whole family.
In 1938  five years after the Nazis came to power  Gerry and his family moved to London  England  where they waited for visas to the United States.
They came together  except for one brother who left Russia at the age of 12 by himself to go to America.
No  they didnt they they just kept him overnight  they didnt why did he steal  or maybe they ask him  he said its for my family  they dont have what to Interview with Go ldie Buch Jonas May 5  2013 60eat  you know  maybe he said that.
Can you tell me a little bit about the religious life of your family?
Occasionally I meet somebody from the south whose family has been here a long time and they even have a southern accent and I always find it very strange.
In our extended family w e have over 200 members of our Dutch family that were murdered  murdered  gassed  who knows?
When you were raising your children  what kind of religious background did they have.
Was there anybody in the family who stayed in Berlin and survived?
Very  very touching  and I mean  again  as youve been speaking about the Italian world  and the Italian world  as I keep saying for two millennia  you know  of your family  and the history  one could make an assumption that some of the success of the people who were part of your family  is built on those who came before.
In my case  I had an unusual life experience  the military life  and I had a ga an interesting Jewish experience  too  because my family  my mother was rigid about it.
Tell me a little bit about the family that you stayed with.
I worked mainly  this is my fate  with German  it was a German company basically  a German family  German workers and I heard enough of... you cannot name a group or a race around the & RG-50.549.05*0001 81 world about whom they were not talking during the day  always in very derogatory terms.
And I d ont know how much he compre hended when he was very young  but he always  when -- when my hu sband went to Vietnam the first time  he says  Im going to be the man of the family   Ill take care of Mommy.
And some of the -- you know  those -- those who couldnt make it -- we had to help the elderly and you know  we -- in advance -- so we whack away that first olea -- the f -- the family airtrads.
Is your sister still in -- In Israel -- In Israel. --
I personally was in a jail cell with my father and another man.
If God wanted to choose a family  and to bring like the Catholics say  to bring the son for the world  who did He pick out?
Well there were even a couple guys that uh--a couple guys murdered a family and robbed them their money and the police caught him later.
Our old apartment was occupied; they gave it to another family .
I miss when the holidays come  not having my extended family with me.
Did he come from a small family  or a large family?
And that's how I have been able to tell the story of my family.
And there was my father's big family  and we were hoping we coul d get back to Poland as fast as we can.
And Im interested in hearing your -- about -- more about that moment that you had been betrayed by the maid of the family and -- in that -- at the farm  that -- that you arrived at and the Germans arrived to arrest you  and you and your father escaped and then you dis -- running away and you discover that youre separated from your father.
An d as the beckoned  I changed the   she sa t in some apartment with some German family wher e I arrived at night and we stayed all night until early in the morning I came and reported to the Major that I brought my wife back.
And I believe that the -- of the s -- a few surviving pictures that I have of my family  immediate family and of my father and mother  I believe I have two things.
So  we had to  we as family like you  you're saying.
And there is the president with his family  and theres the president with his family.
So in the morning I was told the family was taken  my father was taken  and therefore I should go now to USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0076 20contingency place number three  which was the -- this employee  so -- so within three days  we went from contingency one to contingency two  to cont-contingency three like this.
And Im going to talk a lot about my family  what happened.
Also late r  with the fur  they caught some fur in somebodys house and they killed the fam ily  the whole family.
And so  so somewhere not many  we couldnt really put it in words  but some way we were aware of that the   my Jewish relatives were in danger.
>> Bill Benson: Frank  tell us about some of your family members that remained in Germany.
Tell me a little bit about your mother and your father.
He was the bread winner in the family after my father die d. We didn't have that big a shop  but nevertheless you still have to have somebody running it.
But among my friends  if I came along my Jewish friends  we spoke Yiddish.
Did you talk to people about your experiences during the war?
So they settled down in that little town and bought a house on the market place just opposite the city hall and we had this store for 110 years in the family.
>> Bill Benson: In 1941  then  that's when the Germans came in.
So your family life  until 43  until the time of deportation was every evening you were all home together.
She had gone to Paris seeking -- looking for anybody she had been connected with during the war  because she had lost all her family.
>> Bill Benson: When I first met you  you had believed and said -- you believed that 13 members of your extended family had not survived the Holocaust.
And I -- I -- the family did not understand that I had pride  I didnt want to be given few cents.
I came from a middle class  lower upper class  small town family.
He is of this family that was too conservative  and so on.
A nd  well  she had a major j ob  obviously  was bringing up Interview with Hugh Montfort Jenkins 5 a family.
And later on  yeah my mothers brother and his family went to Denmark and they got news there quite often and would pass it on to us.
Yes  well  I believe we reached the -- virtually the end  almost the end of the war  when Romania shifted sides  and then what happened  rele vant to the past  that th -- we mean the past is  that we -- we really tied ti -- tried to find out what happened to everybody else in our family.
And so my father...they agreed that my father would go to America where all...where his father and all the Margolis family had settled in Dayton  Ohio.
So this woman by the name of Hirsch  here in New York  did not know that she had family in Israel.
whether you had siblings  what kind of circumstances your family was in  and how you came to be in this world.
>> Bill Benson: When you knew you were liberated  what did you do then?
Tell me  what are some of your earliest memories from home?
End of Tape Three  Side B 67 Beginning Tape Four  Side A This is a continuation of a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Paulette Nehama.
Oddly enough  believe it or not we had very good non-Jewish neighbors who were very friendly.
So  my parents went - they struggled but we lived normally like any other  because the Jewish people - the Jewish population  especially the religious ones  they were tradesmen  small businessme n. They were all poor  like  they werent rich people.
Did you have quite a bit of relatives  cousins  aunts  uncles  grandparents?
They separated our family by taking the young ones and putting them to work in big apartment buildings  that they made in factories  for the SS men.
Interview with Algimantas Gureckas October 14  2010 16 Were you closer to your mothers family than to your fathers  growing up?
But I -- Maybe this -- End of Tape One  Side A Beginning Tape One  Side B This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Esther Dezube .
Did you see any other Jewish families at all during that year and a half or any other Jewish children?
And they took the whole family in about whoever was  you know  about five hundred families from or maybe more...on a on a train and shipped us off to Siberia.
We know what happened to you during the war period but is there anything from your perspective that you would like to tell me?
This man like her strudel and he offered to take her to Heidelburg to be a maid for his family.
Those nights we could have been a regular American family out for spin whose father maybe tossed a ball with his kids.
When my kid could get the key from the house  they were ten  twelve years old  and I could depend that they can open the door and stay by themself  and they don't  I can trust them th ey won't let anybody in  then I  you know  there were no parents  no family close by that could just do the thing there.
Were you taken to a factory  or do you remember what you were doing?
Well  my sister-in-law and her aunt  bot h Auschwitz survivors  and they were in Germany  my brothers wife and her aunt who ju st died lately.
Yes  but lets go I I Id like to understand how life developed  and what happened in your family  where you eventually ende d up in concentration camp.
So -- her family is from up there -- from -- from Maine  her mothers family is from Maine and her fathers family is from New Hampshire.
My -- law is on one s -- hand  family and love and -- and -- and -- and -- and -- and the sense of obligation and commitment a nd protection to the children  of your children  to preserve them.
Was it hard to -- you know  it sounds like in many ways you were in a really good situation with your family.
Theres no family life  and I th ink this is what affects the children.
Do you remember having Jewish friends and not knowing that you were Jewish  or No  I had no idea.
>> Bill Benson: And with Germany and the Soviet Union attacking Poland in September 1939  beginning World War II  it was some months after that  however  before the war actually directly affected you and your family when the Soviets occupied your hometown of Vascauti.
What did that mean  \ Free to go\  for you and your family?
Interview with Edith Weinstein May 18  2015 88 Because at the time he didnt had no place to go  he had no more family.
I pretended that it didnt happen to me  but I didnt say this to him  I just said  ﬁI dont want to talk about it  were not going to talk about it.ﬂ Yes  my me -- my family knew I was a survivor.
Do you remember how your mother what kind of was your mother crying  was she I dont remember.
He married twice  he had th e first wife  thats -- you saw the picture  Tamara  shes from Morocco Jews  Moroccan Jews  a nice family.
When German SS and police began mass killings of the Jews in Dokszyce in 1942 Rachel and her family went into hiding.
Because I was the only child and I knew what happened to my mother  but not to my father  I was thinking how to get back to Romania and I knew that in south Transylvania  were my uncle and his family  two uncles and one aunt  they are living  I knew that they are alive because from Romania  we find out  there was no deportation to Poland  to Auschwitz.
I f eel that my family survived and Judaism survived with them  and its not going to disappear until therell be two people  like in Masada .
And when the war broke out  just tell us...t ake your time...tell us what happened to you and what you did in the early years of the war.
Our family  my mother's special family...was a child didn't...didn't have to say a by...by a marriage who...uh...they want this or this.
We had a  I remember just feeling very safe in my family.
I know how it felt to be a refugee w ith no home  no family  no help.
Actually one family that had a lot of our possessions and it was a big risk because they would smuggle food to us in the ghetto.
Did you have extended family in town  grandparents  aunts  uncles  cousins.
Can you tell us a bit about your childhood and your parents and your siblings if you have any?
I assume that there were Jewish families  but that it was not a predominately Jewish . . .
And then we didnt know about the Tannenblume side of the family  where they were.
>> Bill Benson: But the bribe took everything you had to do that.
She came from a very religious family  Jewish religious family  so in the morning she did not tell us that she was raped  but we knew she was raped  because USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0057 7you -- you could hear the sounds.
The rest of the family  Aunt Miriam  she disappeared from us in the very early part of the ghetto.
Because other sons of the rabbi who lived in the United States and in Switzerland had taken steps to the pope and to all the great of the world to take their family out of the ghetto.
This is a picture of my grandparents on my mothers side.
There was one boy and of course  this is all boys  this is all gender segregated one boy whose family was in Tangier .
He said  ﬁWell  Im very sorry  but my family has an estate in -- close to Buenos Aires  in Argentina.ﬂ Then I went to see my father  and I told him that -- that I was going to try to leave.
Now  I dont th -- I dont think that that was quite as di -- as long on my mothers side of the family  b ecause I understand that from their aspects  my mothers grandfather  m-my gra -- my great-grandfather came from Poland in the days when Poland was under Russian law  and rode across the border into Germany  into -- into Silesia.
The family obviously took care of me while my mom was away.
So it was a part of all I been  my family  my bigger family.
Her parents lived at a nearby sh her mother was was left with a large family  and a a sick husband  and so the children had to be had to work rather early to help her make a living.
>> I was wondering if when your sister immigrated to the United States what was the reason that nobody else in your family was able to follow her or why didn't anyone else go to the United States with her when she left in 1937?
I remember my family  they want to go to a smaller place.
>> Bill Benson: So here's you and your brother now are with your aunt and uncle.
So some members of you f larger  extended family  made it to England much earlier  under normal immigration Yes.
And just talk a little bit about your childhood  your family  your family background.
But I tell you  when we were liberated  when we li-liberated in Theresienstadt  nobody was happy  because you were kind of [indecipherable] and say why me  how about my family  you know  there was no joy.
H-How -- how -- h-how did it play a part in your family?
I believe that I was aware of the fact that the -- my father's family was deported  was taken away from Transylvania.
Are you still trying to deal with everything yourself then  or have you ever seen a therapist or have you asked your family to help you in a different way?
Because I want to save my family  those are my children and my wife  and they started to hit him a nd I remember that the -- like the blood was drdripping from my father face and my f-father he ad.
And I dont know what happened to all of the documents  but I do know that years later I purchased a book from my library written by John Wheeler Bennett  whic h was the -- the mc -- ﬁNemesis of Power; A History of the German Generals Staff.ﬂ And I know that a lot of the research and documentation that appeared in John Wheeler Bennetts book had to come from the documents that we recovered through General Warlimont on this visit -- il-illegal visit to his family.
Our place was one room and we shared it with three other families.
What were your parents doing in the early part of the ghetto times?
This is my maternal grandfather  my mom and dad  my mom's brother and his wife.
On the other hand  I myself even so I had family in Israel.
And so we...we were very...you know  we didn' t eat a lot of things that were put in front of us.
I assume that there were Jewish families  but that it was not a predominately Jewish . . .
So you were there with your mother  your father and your brother?
It was time because I ha d no relationship with anyone -- with survivors  per se  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0068 97and the only one was my girlfriend from Be nzheim DP  with whom I corresponded  and she came  as a matter of fact  to visit us on ce with her family  in Springfield  when we still lived in Springfield.
The building where Sam and his family already lived was in the middle of the ghetto.
So the book is about a family of very rich Iranian Jews who had a jewelry store.
I went to see a teacher of mine  an old teacher who -- I understand that he had an estate  or his family had an estate in Amer ica.
And I have a brother who is not even six years old.
We went to see her family  stayed for a week  10 days in Versailles  outside of Paris  saw the sights  came back.
I ha ve some pictures on my fathers side of the family.
>> Bill Benson: Before you tell us about that  you and your brother were possibly and probably the only Jews left in the town.
I I I am sorry that I did not find my German family sooner than I did  but I am thankful and grateful that not only did I find them  or reach out to them I always knew where they were  and they always knew where I was  but that they embraced me  a-and accepted me.
>> I just wanted to know  Did you have any other family that was out of the country other than Poland?
But  I felt good with my family and in the coun try.
Did you -- and -- and did you feel very Jewish?
When you were raising your children  what kind of religious background did they have.
A. No  there were rabbis all along the line al most  going even six and seven generations back there were rabbis in the family.
Interviewer: As you got out of the car  your family stayed together?
So could you tell me a l ittle bit about your life  your your early -- the earliest you can remember?
And so I began uh right away to to look for my German counterpart  the German Consul there who was very busy uh with all the events going on  but I insisted that he meet me and uh he uh he was not anxious to do it  but eventually uh I didn't...I didn't uh let up and so about midnight that night in a restaurant we finally met and he told me the first part of the story  01:21:53 that a few days earlier German uh police had raided the home of Hans Seidlmeier  who was a manager of the Mengele family enterprises in Gunzburg what was then West Germany  and uh had found some papers  notes  letters with some addresses on them indicating that uh uh where Mengele either was or had been  so without any knowledge as to whether he was alive or dead  the German authorities immediately came to Brazil  contacted the Federal police and had staked out this house uh whose address they they gleaned from this information  but after a few days of staking the house out and not seeing any any old man who looked uh he would possibly in uh Josef Mengele's category of age group or whatever  they raided the house 01:23:04 6 and uh and uh came upon this couple  Wolfgang and Lisalotte Brossert  uh who were German Brazilians and who uh quickly admitted that they had had a role in in uh sheltering and protecting Josef Mengele for the last few years of his life according to the story they told and that when he died by drowning on the beach...he was with them at this beach...that he had had a stroke while he was uh...this is what she said...that he had had a stroke while he was swimming there in this beach town of Bertioga  and uh that uh he therefore drowned because he couldn't get out of the water  and Mrs. Brossert uh decided right there that she didn't want to expose and reveal the whole story of of Mengele's hiding and so on and their role in it most importantly  so she went to some length to bury him under a false name and by bending some rules about the identification of the dead and so on  buried him there some uh five or six years before and uh now took the authorities there for the exhumation and was quite uh forthcoming with information.
Now  people may wonder over this whole period of time why Jews didn't just get out of Germany.
Tell us how he did that  what he found  and about coming back to get his family.
You dont want to go  we are not going because my wifes family was  they all were in Israel.
And I actually helped the family  you know  that they -- the -- the family  because I was able to get some bread  a nd etcetera.
The family business got worse and wo rse all the time.
ﬂ ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 34 And seven years ago my granddaughter was 7.
For a while  their families used to get a letter or two--even money paid by the by the Jewish Council in the ghetto-to make us believe they're working someplace else  and that's is the pay the family is getting.
Anyway  they helped my brother and me to stay with a family in the outskirts  in a tiny little village in the outskirts of Paris.
We finally made contact with the family in America  and once contacts were made through an uncle of mine...he who was one of the founders of the UJA  very prominent in Jewish life in New York.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 25 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: Germany or every occupied country  had on the front page a report from the front.
And this was the surname of the family where my father was hidden in Brussel  they were Verbrugen  okay?
Did -- do you remember having conversations with your parents  were your parents telling you were trying to go to -- Oh yes. --
>> Bill Benson: Tell us what you can about the Bocahut family.
What do you remember about your town and your family life while growing up?
Turned out it was  almost  you know  and people had three cars in the family  I thought they were lying  but thats how it is  they do.
Now my -- my mo thers family -- and she had three sisters and two brothers  lived in Danzig  which is Gdansk.
And visited my grandmothers  two grandmothers and the family and maybe childhood friends  but those were I was wondering if you saw any destroyed synagogues or things like that?
When the whole thing finished  and all my family disappeare d  the few friends that were left  they were Orthodox  and they called me Nick.
Between 1922 and 1933 when Hitler comes to power  how did your family feel living in Germany?
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VER BATIM RECORD 14 So they came in.
>> Ronald Coleman: Did your family -- what language did they speak when you were young?
And at her home  her mother kept kosher  because the grandmother used to live with them  and it -- they kept the kosher home  and they 9 were re-religious  and the -- the holy days  y-you know  they had that  the holy days.
You know  where youve seen relationships between the parents and the children and -- and thats part one and then part two is -- ha-has there been any entrance in your own family  of these issues?
A rabbi  if he is educated and its going from the nation then from-from family to family  he can take over.
And  had your parents come from families that were all originally from Germany ?
And it was a time when the trial was finished  before they handed out the verdicts  there was suddenly the permission  that the family of the defendants  not knowing what the result of the trial will be for them  they could visit for once  their fathers.
After that  your life and that of your family changed dramatically.
The moment the war broke out  Mr. London told me that he and his family are going to evacuate  but since I'm working  I should go and look for a place to stay.
First class not the same money  but the others  they were just assigned a family to a cabin.
And of course the family we were hiding with  the Viyas family  yes.
They were taking them by boat  a lot of people went from there to e to that time to Palestine  and a lot of people got caught I have a lot of family caught on Cyprus.
>> Bill Benson: In June 1938 your father was able to leave?
They collected gold  silver  jewelry  anything  any kind of jewelry  watches  anything that was valuable  you had to turn it in  money.
Were these people mostly Jewish or not Jewish A. No  not Jewish.
Tell us about the arrangements to leave Paris and where you went from there in the summer of 1942.
Then they decide -- Did you have any contact with your mother?
And when theres no family relationships  its just person to person  it becomes different.
And  uh  the pictures  uh and some other pictures were given  and plus these medals were stuck in  he had given to this family and they gave it back to me.
So that was a long eveni ng  you know  but we were so tired and stuff  you know  and you know  first time at my aunts  and the rest of the family and all that.
Why did I engage in what is clearly unequivocally Jewish family history.
I feel guilty to my sister   to myself because I don't have any pictures of my family  my parents from before the war.
And I looked upon him (he was older  was a graduate chemist) as he was in charge of our total family  looking out for us.
And as Bertl e is getting older  one of her big joys in life is we had this big family  10 cousins.
So sometimes the closeness of the family  the attachment to the family sometimes it was a curse for the Jews.
Theres a big tragedy in that family  too  but I wont tell you about.
His family  his father was here before the First World War and then he came  he went back.
So we had a space maybe five by 20  or five by 18  or a little place that you put like a sukkoh  and you put blankets all around  and you were sleeping on the floor  the whole family.
A nd that sort of thing  a p-place to a-avoid the family  and so on.
>> Bill Benson: Up to the time that Germans occupied Hungary.
And it was  I guess what you would picture of a normal Jewish family of Poland  which was very  very nice.
I dont remember that we have ever been invited to a Jewish holiday  to a family.
Those who did not succeed were caught and detained and the punishment was that they were detained for several days without parents or family knowing about them.
Then we were told that we had to go to the Ghetto because they were going to have a separate place  a Ghetto  for the Jews.
Was there somethi ng about your family that made them Well we didnt have anybody else.
And were you still -- y-you were still working whether your father the -- was there or not?
This is tape number two  side A. And you had returned from Switzerland   and you had gone with your family to Stuttgart.
My brother was married  my older brother  and he was with his wife and my mother and myself.
I was hoping that maybe they photographed our family  which for me  would have been priceless but they didnt have any.
This is my maternal grandfather  my mom and dad  my mom's brother and his wife.
Y-Yeah  well you know  it was really long time  the hunger was hunger was a one of the big  big problems.
And -- and -- and -- and -- and on my fathers side  I mean sadly  of the family there was almost nobody left that I could even say  well he would have been like this  or like this guy  or somebody else.
But preceding that  had you heard of a man named Hitler?
But the main aim of our family  of my brothers  to get an education; because it was the only way to make a good life  to get away from the Jewishness  from that Judaism that was  did not gave way to the social life surroundings because there was no Jewish social life.
First was  first were in our family  my mother and uh younger sister  Goldie  her real name in Hungarian was Oronco.
And then we had another Austrian family  a man and a wife  because when they left  we had to take somebody else.
And I was in the train  and I was going toward Ansbach  and there my family had been taken to a collection center.
And I think the rest of the family followed in 35.
And their son-in-law couldnt save them  but he saved his family  my sister-inlaw and his daughter.
It was a real gift to me  and a gift to my family who perished.
And after this -- thats was six oclock  or five oclock morning  I listen ed this and we was s -- everybody go in own way  and I go to my parents house where I live  and I chane -- I was lucky change the clothes  wash myself and eat someth ing  and after 15 minute  ma-maybe half hour  I s -- heard  alles raus  bandit handehore  and something thats German ask going out  and the hands up  and leave the basement because my -- my family house was destroyed  and family was in basement.
In one particular part of the village there was...uh...a family named Koch a Polish family  farming and right next to them was a Jewish named Katz and farming also.
Now the house that you lived in  was it a house or an apartment?
So it I thi was Interview with David Halivni June 13  2014 52delighted that the family remembers or some members of the family remember that he that he gave me the money.
10 I wouldnt say that my family was among the poorest families  Jewish families  no  because they were middle class.
As I told you  with this un...when this wa s the evacuation  the liquidation of the Czech family camp  yes.
He had he had a goal  he was going to Palestine to be reunited with his family.
This was  it was ca lled Transylvania  Romania  Hungary  which is the southeastern part of Hungary.
And they already had a little room rented from a family that came in  in 1939 and it was a German family.
If there was a family  they knew they had no food  then they always get so mething from the neighbors.
The -- the Polish people in particular are very  very anti-Semitic  and I -- and how can I -- I can explain it is  my own family and I had an experience  although we were very respected citizens.
But then mother and I we were the only ones left and it got colder already and we didn't have any clothes so there was one family in had a beautiful department store  wealthy Swiss Jews and they always came visiting and see  to see what they can do for the refugees and uh when you know it got colder then uh mother said to them we really don't have any clothes and you know Switzerland is  gets cold pretty soon.
And do you remember what you were told about the leaving?
So she was free to go for a few days  for two days  three days  because I took care of the family  you know.
There was a bakery in a nearby building that belonged to a Turkish family.
There wa s a class-consciousness  even among Jews so that it was unlikely that a pe rson from a well-to-do family would marry someone from a very poor family by contrast.
if if I recall what you said  and i just to summarize  you in the beginning you were told th-the family was told to go into the woods outside of Sieradz Yes.
So you have a family trying to keep itself together as they read newspapers of all the terrible things that are happening around them  and trying to continue leading a normal family life.
Jellin was a very educated  very intelligent young man whose family was known for many years.
Poland was like a stepmother  and I loved Poland and I wanted to be a patriot  but Poland didnt let me love it.
Were you aware of any attack s  verbal or physical  on your family or on your brother or yourself?
So you didnt know what was happening to the rest of the family?
So  you were following the war because Eddies family is still in Vienna  or not?
But at home in Berlin   German was how you spoke  yes?
I mean  is there any kind of community that you maintain because of  sort of that shared experience  or youre just an American now  or A few  but bi because I have a very large family; my father is one of seven  my mother one of four  it was mo it was more [phone ringing] Im sorry about this it was more Oh  thats okay. [
And its quite an open door i ssue in this family.
Tell us what happened when the Hungarians took over your part of Czechoslovakia.
So my mother was placed as a governess in a family near the Eiffel Tower  a family with eight or 10 children.
So there were as the people were coming in  so were people were leaving all the time  so So if you were a child  or you were just  you know  a a young family  I would take it they were not military people  cause the military guys  I mean  the young men were in different places Right.
Those were  that was the family that my mother was hiding and they had resettled after the war  they were all hidden  the members of that family whose name was Roos  R-o-os.
So we actually  as a family  undertook to go towards the city of Krakow.
Tell us about actually going to Israel  the trip you took to get there.
They were a very  very nice family from -- from Rabalninkai  from the north of Lithuania.
You then fled Paris  the family fled Paris  for a third time.
I really don't remember the whole thing  but my mother was from a very plain  hardworking family  and I never knew my grandparents.
Now we had to leave all this family  leave all the people that you knew and move to at least a hundred kilometers away.
And then I rejoined living with them after  for one year or so  till other family members else where in the world started looking for the Sigmann family  and locating us   and discovered we were the only survivors.
My wife gave the name of the sister  the name  the family name.
And that as soon as he became established he would bring family.
Do you remember your parents ta lking about the Nazis before they came in  when they were in power in Germany in 1933?
And it was a decision that family made  and -- Right.
Your family met you when the boat came in in New York.
My mothers family lived in a little town called Falksen  which was near Hannover.
And what was your relationship to your mother and father if you were so close to your siblings?
And on my mothers side  Margaret  her family was in the egg business  wholesale egg distribution business.
And then when I did spend time with that family in the summertime  what she really wanted me to do is to teach her child German.
And then the second moment is when do you remember when you saw your family again in England ?
And duri ng that trip to Europe and on the way back  I started to tell Flo more and more because she had met the family.
Food was rationed  but my father would -- he decided that we have 13 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD to -- we cannot spare anything  we just have to live.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 39 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: night.
Maybe the peop -- the family  where I spent a few nights under the melon  maybe they wanted also have some like [indeciphe rable] advantages  and sh -- they reported somewhere  because Mom  for the first thing where she -- as I said  I -- as I mentioned Voencomat  so she -- she puts [indecipherable] and this way and come on  they -- it was very powerful -- I see. --
Q. Tell me a little bit about your life in the Ghetto  how it was?
And did you did your mother still have help around the house?
Did your parents have any discussions that you might have been present for  or you might have overheard  about what was happening in other parts of Europe?
There are -- there are papers from my mothers side of the family.
You were not quite 14 years of age when Germany attacked Poland in September 1939.
He's done these family trees f or each of the Jewish families.
How far back did your family go in in Germany ?
>> Jacqueline Mendels Birn: Since all my family died  there is something called [Speaking Non -English Language].
When I was the keynote speaker the first time with Mayor Daly  my daughter-in-law came to listen as di d some friends and family.
And -- But we were very close with the other relatives  with the cousins and aunts.
It wasnt a family thing  and when I was 13-14 I stopped believing anyway  and for me it was more complicated  becau se I had gone to church when I was little in the village  and so.... Lets back up.
And you knew that he was okay  the family was treating him well?
Yeah  right  so so the family has been there for you know  a few hundred years.
If I may move us in 1942  July of 1942  things got worse for your family.
Laughter ) Than April 30  so  you know  it was the International Labor Day under the communist -- under the communist regime all over the world and I had some communists in my family  some of my father's siblings were communists  so to please them he just changed the date to May 1.
Anthony: So your family  your entire family was Elizabeth and your husband  and his name?
My whole family if you want to know what my family did  I should say almost --about 75 percent of my family was in the furniture business  salesmen or in the business.
And of course we don't have time to talk about many of your other family members  but both not only highly educated but some really sign ificant people.
>> Bill Benson: On that night of November 910  Kristallnacht  Night of the Broken Glass  for you   I think you told me that you were coming home or somewhere and you saw an art store that mattered to you  and that was destroyed   and that's when you realized what was going on.
Did you get to know many Jewish families  how did that work?
My father was the sole supporter of the family at this time  2 and my mother was - He was a textile designe r. He managed a textile mill with 300 people.
>> Bill Benson: Your family was also able to build a bunker.
Did anybody else live with you or was it just you  your mother  and your brother and sister and father?
Uh can you tell us your earliest recollecti ons of  from your childhood about your town and your home  your family?
In my home were refugees from Warsaw who knows my sister  and my sister was in Warsaw.
And of course  house didnt have the bathrooms  you -- you went out -- outs -- the outside bathroom  which every family has a key from his own place.
Gi-Give me a sense  a little closer sense of what was family life like  the s -- the social occasion.
So  this individual  wh o was originally from Salonika  and who was a -- in the stock market in Salonika  the legal stock market  he had  with his family  escaped from Salonika  established himself in Athens  and then started a -- an office by himself.
Do you  what else do you remember about  what else happened during the ‚56 war?
>> Bill Benson: When you went to Paris at age 16  leaving your mother and family behind  do you recall if that was especially frightening for you?
U h  my father's side of the family  my aunt's uh wedding.
That was an apartment maybe of three  four rooms  but there were three or four families in the apartment.
And Henry my close cousin and his sister and his family  he is now about to be 90 in August  were on their own.
I think she didn't even have a Jewish name  I mean  Christian  I don't know of any family  of any Jewish family would know uh  would name a  a girl by that name because it's a gentile name  it's not a Jewish name.
Did did did the did any health officials  or anyone come to your family to explain that they thought deafness was hereditary?
>> Bill Benson: So you and your brother are now with your aunt and uncle.
In the end  I was very glad I did that or we did that.
But I was afraid because if I would escape  my family would be murdered right there and then.
But between them were pictures and uh arrangement of a nice room of a nice Jewish family.
Thats what I can tell you though  its just Lets ser turn back to family life.
Back to well actually in the 17 th century  my fathers family came from Holland to Poland.
Very eagerly a family  and when we found...Gusti had seven pregnancies and she  in these seven pregnancies...she had no problem getting pregnant.
And...uh...I lived first with a family that needed a babysitter and I took care of the baby after I came home from school and then later when my father made...could afford it and we had an 19 apartment  I moved in with my parents.
They had  for instance  the various pieces of silver for my parents  which my parents might have hidden somewhere  I dont know  and that was distributed among the various members of the family.
I took the train and went to this place and I was there for several weeks  but this place was...this family lived in a little village  had a very nice house in this village and of course the people saw me.
Kristallnacht  the Night of Broken Glass  tell us what that was and what it meant for your family.
He was so sure that the other members of the family had survived because we had survived.
My family  at that time  we had too much to eat  because we had access to everything at much lower prices than the real Black Market.
Was it worse than what you had with this Po lish -- I mean  with th is Ukrainian family?
I'm from a pretty dysfunctional family  but here is the first evidence.
It was my father  my mother and myself and my younger brother.
People dont realize how lucky they are that they have them  and I mean  they can fuss about a relative this or a relative that  then I tell them  ﬁYou have -- You have no idea how I -- how -- how -- how I would love to have a co usin that I could fight with  you know  because its better than having nobody around.ﬂ But  its with everything else  if you dont know it  you dont miss it  and people dont realize it  when they have all this extended family  and so -- even if you bury so mebody  even if you bury thats a pr -- thats a privilege compared to what we went through  cause nobody has a grave.
Do you know  were your parents members of the Jewish community?
And then I found a family  that we were together in the ghetto and then later  they went to Canada.
>> Bill Benson: Erika  one of the things I know you've told me about is when the Germans first came  they gathered everybody in a field and started shooting everybody  and you were able  you and your father were able to  and your family were able to survive that.
So now if you would tell me about what happened with the other items  this sort of surprise phone call that you received  other items that wound up being -- belonging to your family  and that you didnt even know about.
He gave me  and so I went to the villages in County Michalovce to have a look if somebody is from the family.
His name is Cl aude and he looks exactly like my cousin Claude because they were the same age  the same family  the same -- very similar kind of family  Polish emigrants.
He used to be our family doctor and his wife  and Doctor Eskind and his wife came over because they knew Andys going to leave.
So my extended family was roughly 250 people at the beginning of the war.
If you don't have cash or money  UNRA give you a certain amount money for lo oking for your family for your   whatever it is.
And they went in hiding  but a small group didnt know where to go  mostly so mewhere in your circle of family or friends  there is somebody where you can go and hide.
So we then we tried to tell the local population  the local Jewish population  our our own people in in the Jewish Community Center.
My firs t concern was  when is our family going to come?
I feel comfortable to bring Jewishness and religion into my house and through my family I have been a member of a synagogue all through the years being in America  even at times it was hard financially to do so.
And if you can tell us about where you were born.
But most of his extended family and his mother  his grandmother had 11 children  lived in New Bedford so it Interview with Rosa Weinstein September 19  2013 24 was a very close knit family and it was an unusual thing for me to go from no family at all to th is great extended family.
We were afraid maybe one of the family wouldn't come back.
What did you know about Hitler and Nazism in Germany proper at that time?
So your father did whatever he could do to -- He done everything just to -- to support his family.
I -- I see -- at least I seem to recollect that the people we were with were all Jewish.
Q. Can you tell me about the circumstances that led up to liberation  the weeks  the time what you remember about just before liberation  where you were?
They let us walk towards inside Galacia and but before that the man with the hanging arm was taken away and we heard the shots and the family dug a grave at that time and they buried him.
Most of these relatives being my grandmother's sisters  brothers  and their children.
Everybody there was gone from her famil y. Her brother  the brothers family  the three children and his wife.
Did did anyone in your family particularly get sick  so you know  got was was too weak Not special  we all we re sick  but not special.
And I I think thats important to know  Interview with Witold Pawlikowski January 21  2015 147that you just live once  and you live for a ve ry short period of time  and it is much simpler to live a simple life  a normal life  where you have family  where you have you go to church  where you worship  where you remember that it it was not your doing that you were saved  it was some thing else.
It was like uh a family and everybody knew kind of what was up a nd and that year in school although at the end of that school year people disappeared.
Then we came here to the United States and my father again went into a different business.
Although the family was divorced and his mother lived in the lake district  and so on.
My family was more Hassidic  ultra  ultra orthodox and their family was modern.
There were cousins  like one cousin was my fathers cousin  which I knew the family quite well  and they were also.
My parents could only put two and two together an d surmised that probably what I told them that I suffer from TB They in turn went to my family physician  a Jewish Dutchman doctor by the name of Dr. Hertzberger.
On the other hand it was so close to Warsaw that all the people may have been moved to Warsaw.
So my parent  my -- my family did not immigrated from no place.
So they sent us out to Gloucestershire  and we lived in a little town a little village outside of Cheltenham  and we were boarded with a family there.
My mother  my grandparents  my aunts and uncles  cousins  there's nobody left  even for a holiday to sit at the table together except for the family I created  my children th at I'm very proud of  but it's not enough.
So -- So was sitting around listening to the radio something that your family did?
And this year the Madna family was honored  and that was an incredible experience for me.
13 In what ways was your life in Cuba what you had expected it would be and what ways was it very different?
Almost all in my family did have education at high school education and me and my younger brother who went together  that was a big expense for my parents.
It was important  of course it helped me mentally to be with somebody  but there was a rule in Poland at that time that the Jewish family cannot live together.
>> Bill Benson: As you said  you ended up  the family  to bribe officials in order to get your visas to get out.
Do you see your family at this point  during this time?
She grew up in th she when I say she  my wife and her family were Catholic.
That was in Cleveland and then when we lived in Delawa re  Newark  Delaware  we lived in a very nice  almost new subdivision over there and there was another family somewhere not too far from our house whose -- the father was an army officer and they had two or three kids and one was as old as my son and they were USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0006 68good friends.
And the family from Detroit let know the family in New Jersey that I am arriving on this ship and somebody should pick me up because they are her funeral.
So but there were questions all the time  and and in another group of people who who could have who became part of the the extended family were the teachers and the parents that used to pick the kids up.
Not only did they do that to every Jewish family in the c ommunity  but they did loot all of the Jewish stores that were left that were selling to Jewish people  because nobody else was buying from them.
My parents we  as a family went out for dinners  usually on Thursday night or something.
After the war my uncle  Michael Fass  who went in our place when we couldnt go in 1935 to Oakland to emigrate  then my great-uncle sponsored my -- her brother  my mothers brother  my Uncle Fass  and they  the whole family emigrated  went to Oakland in our place.
He had a few packets of cigarettes so he wanted to sell them to buy some bread for his family.
It also sounds that the sense of of what it is to be Polish was very strong in your family.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0059 19 Yeah  lets wait a little bit  because I have a -- another question with regard to your family.
But meanwhile though your parents had settled in a basically Jewish area?
As I said  we tried to emigrate from the time of 1936 but we didn't have any close family in America.
I was responsible for my job where I wa s in Slobonov so I had to leave my family.
There was a Jewish family living couple Jewish families on on the Kestucio gatvs.
And with considerable pleasure on my part  my parents gave them the violin.
I would be livi ng with other people  not with them  and I should never divulge my real name because it would not be safe and I should not divulge that I was Jewish and I should just remember that that they loved me very much and that hopefully they would see me again and  uh  they were  uh  and I  I just remember that this family was very special and warm and and good and I just really loved them and  uh  I liked being there and they had  uh  because they had such a large family they had a lot of children in the neighborhood for me to play with and fr om what Cornelia tells me now  while I don't remember it  I didn't cry very much after the fi rst week and I didn't seem to miss my parents very much after that and I sort of just fit in and played with the children in the neighborhood and one of the things I thought about was how I fit in with them  because I had always pictured that I would...this is in going back and thinking what it might have been like then ...and I had always pictured that all Dutch people had blonde hair so I had fantasized that I had had my hair dyed blonde and I asked Cornelia on this trip whether I in fact had my hair dyed blonde and she said no  it wasn't necessary b ecause her father  uh  had dark hair.
So  I was very happy to do it  and my intention was mainly was if I could go ahead inside and maybe I'll be able to find my family inside the ghetto  and Lisa  whatever I can do and help and see ﬁI'll decide what I can do later.ﬂ He dropped us off  four of us.
And I think the family hero was grandpa who started a resistance and all of that .
But if you lose your whole family  then there is not much meaning to it.
All of them  the least  had three children  my grandmothers sisters  and more.
And you're talking about most of us had big families  like I say.
That's Daniel Swartzfooter's family was one I should say of the wealthiest people in Warsaw.
We had a lot of feud in the family because whats happened  taking me from Goldschmidt.
I was so busy worrying about myself  I never worried about any of my family.
So my father had a collection of silver money and he gave it to this gentile family.
So we were hidden  and also there was a couple the girl 's boyfriend one of the she had two brothers in that family and a son.
Lets talk a little bit about the generations of your family.
So the three of us went with this family  this couple.
My parents spoke Yiddish amongst themselves a nd the whole family spoke Yiddish.
And in our home I was with my mother with another sister.
Did you ever -- ever relate that to your experience in Germany  in relation to Jews?
And I got a job with a very nice Bulgarian family.
All of them managed to get to Palestine as it was known at the time except for our family and my mothers youngest sister who was also a twin.
We lived by a family who rented out one little room and we were able to use one little burner in our room.
So that was never spoken about and Cornelia tells me that her family did not know where my parents were  didn't know my real name  didn't know where I came from.
He will -- he has now all of my papers that he will organize  and go through  and he [indecipherable] source with my family  if any [indecipherable] for the Holocaust  he has the records  and he will get the -- the interview tape  too.
Did you -- I dont -- How long were you at Bergen-Belsen [indecipherable] We were at Bergen-Belsen just a couple of months -- a few months.
O.K. How did you know that your family had a rrived.
And it was really the Jewish people that lived there were really all my relatives.
We did go  for instance  in between...someone told us about a priest in another village in the which is the...he was hiding a Jewish family.
Uh I remember my family unit of claiming a little corner in that uh basement and uh we sort of stuck together uh close b--because there was no really room to move around.
Before we turn to those years and the war and the Holocaust  tell us a little about your family and you before the Nazis were in control of Germany.
Was there any oth was it like Rosen The family name was Rosenstamm .
By the time we came to America  I was still full of impetigo and eventually  unfortunately gave it to the whole family in America  including the two year old child  but in order to hide the condition  I was put into gloves.
The church was the...the holy...the name was the Holy Family CHurch.
And were y was your family able yo-you you left everything  then.
I came from a family from many  ma ny sisters and brothers and cousins and uncles and aunts.
As far as other extended family  do you know what happ ened to them and if so what it was?
>> Bill Benson: At some point I think even before Kristallnacht you started having vandalism done to your family business.
What was it like for you to leave your extended family  the relatives?
I dont have to love the mother  the father and the whole family.
I wasnt be able to be happy with my life since I found out I was thinking maybe I will find somebody from the family.
They asked me how things were going with the family and I hush-hu sh told them that I guess everybody everyone is all right  but I have been caught.
When I came Szczecin  Esther already had a room that rented with a German family  and it was moved in.
My mother decided to go to visit her family in Poland.
The whole family went on a -- on a truck and they pulled me out.
And the Germans that were there  they kicked them out of the houses  so they could house us.
At that time I was already  I had a family of course  but I was already not divorced from my wife  but we lived Separate?
Then I realized that Ill never go to Israel so I never left my family.
Well  at that time  you know  since the Russians had occupied Poland for Couple years  yeah.
The question is really the role of Danes and their resistance to the Germans and whether or not -- how many Jews they were able to protect or save.
No  he was born in Germany  and he -- he and his family [coughs] also left Germany in 1937 and lived in Holland until 1939  and were then able to come to America.
So youre saying those times that you moved  that was actually because the Nazis  the Germans were saying to your family  you have to get into the ghetto now  you have to keep moving.
Do you know if you had other relatives in Paris or do you know if you had a large  extended family back in Poland?
And when I ask that  you see  it also tells me a little bit more about how well off or not well off a persons family was.
So I -- I -- I ask him those things  so I said to the people  I said  ﬁNow  do you think th at if I will come to his house  its a eight family house  all are blacks  he lives on the top floor  nine oclock at night  and I came in and I will tell him this what he said  and I will be alive  I will be here  huh?ﬂ So they asked then the -- my mechanic  he was Ukrainian  and he said  ﬁI just came in to fix something.ﬂ So they thought that he is lying  so on the spot -- on the spot they said you dont belong to the organization any more  youre not a president and you -- we dont believe you.
Why dont we talk a little bit about what you remember about where you lived  what your parents were like  what it was like when your grandparents moved into the house with you.
Gottlieb  seen here  was a banker from a religious Jewish family.
Tell us what happened and then from there you went into the ghetto.
He turned around and he says to my father \ Here  Mr. Gitelman \  he said in Russian  \ They killed your family.
We had a family  and  you know  when I was growing up life was different.
And what were the name of the -- the family who -- who helped you and who -- who you -- the friends of your grandparents?
