When I came here  I tried to go maybe to a service once or twice  but I co uldnt face it  and besides  I completely turned against religion  because my parent s were -- my father  my mother wasnt as religious as my father  but my father was extremely religious and I fel -- felt that with all the praying that my father did and all the beliefs that  and this ha ppened  I just couldnt face going to the synagogue  I just didnt feel comfortable.
Some of my books Ive always been interested in social ramifications of religion.
And it was Were you were you unhappy about being Jewish?
And -- but it -- it required moments of that nature to make -- to ma ke me -- to make me even thi nk about -- about religion.
But my father also then  it was very inte resting in our little apartment  ‚cause he– there was no rabbi in Spartanburg and so he– I dont know if they ever had one before the war  whether they just got– I mean the Jewish co mmunity learned right away about his vast knowledge of Jewish culture and religion and that he could actually officiate at a service.
We are a part of this universe and well stay here forever and the choice will be ours  whatever religion each one of us will choose.
So I went to a Jewish school with a Jewish teacher.
As a child it was just a religion that for some reason wasnt popular at that time in that country.
You know  the things that our grandmother taught us to be concerned about ot her people  to be practically practicing our religion.
Im very pr oud of our heritage during all the time of the religion and their history.
So we told him because he was a very religion Christian  we told him that after the war we will change to Christia nity.
And  did your parents have any contact with Jewish families  Jewish people?
I I did not know much about Jewish religion at that point.
We had quite an animated discussion about it and I think I must have to ld them in no uncertain terms that I was trying to save the children not trying to save the religion and if anybody would take children  I didn't inquire into those matters and they were very cross at the time saying -- and when I said isn't it better to have a Jew rather than a dead one because we were fairly certain what was going on which very few people were at that time.
And the devotion to keep religion  and the devotion to each other  the helpfulness of one to another gave strength.
He sends them to a place where a Catholic religious -- religious man -- Im not sure what they call that  its -- its an order of the Catholic religion.
I mean there -- for many Jews in this country  there has been sort of -- the Holocaust has been treated almost like a substitute religion  part icularly in recent years and I think that is almost sick.
And I  if I consider myself anything  I am Jewish  and Im not religious.
You proved that you are a and that is the highest religion  education and achievement.
Did you take on any of the reli gious feeling or the sense of religion that your father had?
SL: And then they cu -- And he has a nerve to say that they took away his freedom to practice his religion and comes to the count ry and gets away with it.
If I feel anything -- and that it -- religion  and this is interesting because it comes out when I'm very sick or when there is major disaster  I pray and I was raised also in a Dutch reformed school environment  so I am basically Calvinist  but I've had Catholic boyfrie nds  Jewish boyfriends  so that's -- but I feel very  very  very un-Jewish.
Tell me about reli -- what your religion means to you  and do you go to synagogue regularly?
How long after you were liberat ed  did you  did it take you to ob serve the Jewish religion again?
They -- the Jews  the very religious Jews said its a sin [indecipherable]  because you have to be buried in Jewish religion.
because I had a Jewish you know  I had the Hebrew school and at the school and thats it.
The -- the only thing was the language  bu t I had the delusion that I spoke English and -- and I rapidly understood that I had to make majo r efforts to -- Did all of this strengthen your se nse of religion?
And you know  I'm telling y ou those stories because I'm seeing that all over  in every country and in every religion  and even in every home  ther e can be people who are good or not so good.
You said your family was not very religious but they sent you to a Jewish school  religious school.
He sees us  he opens the door  he says  for that purpose I am not going to go according [indecipherable] religion.
So he was a graduate of this yeshiva and he was religious.
Well  my parents were not rel -- they were Jews  but not fanatical -- not religious.
Did you get did you go to synagogue  did you get religious instruction?
That was about as much religion as I got because my father would take me  say  \ Come.
Now -- Also -- also  the children did not know we were Jewish.
I feel that I do believe in God  and I am observant  to some extent  traditionally as a Jew.
I'm thinking that to some extent you dism issed religion as a contract  I'm wondering what it is that made you have a need to find your roots?
He was a religious man  not overly  but he was you know  the both sides were very observant Jewish people.
And  of course  I asked him many times and he would always deny that the reason was religion.
I-I had -- my school friends were Jewish  but I had also -- we had a lot around.
And you had said that you werent really aware of religion at that age  but there were a lot of different experiences with religion  that you had.
Was on a Saturday  Wednesday  4 Wednesday  Thursday  Friday  again vandalizing and again the Sabbath keeping and again the religious...they stick their religion to death.
So  at that point  religion  which had been im portant to you before the war was not as important to you– No  I saw what people  if they become fanatic .
But -- But I -- I mean  Im no longer -- but Im not -- Im not -- Im just not a religious person  you know?
I mean  that's definitely  and they haven't really joined any religion except for Jim.
So that's the first time I found out that I was Jewish.
We did have religious training though  but the religious training came because in Vienna at the time religion was part of the curriculum  and since we were Jewish  that was not given in the schools.
But in Europe -- in Germany particularly  religion was a state -- spa -- state sponsored affair.
And I -Im quite sure it was of religion  but Im not one who always finds anti-Semitism anyw here.
So we would go to the classes  so I knew all about the Catholic religion.
We had to study Latin  eight years of Latin  thats a lot of Lati n. We had to study  th e only thing we didnt li ke is religion.
In the final analysis  without   all   religion and education fails.
And I said what  my father would...he was a religious man.
Judaism  if you mean to be Jew  I am a Jew.
Shes USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0038 86 Italian  Catholic  very observant in her religion  but were socially  what is it?
I couldn't imagine why I was hated because I was Jewish.
Of course  Jewi sh is a religion and j they should consider themselves as such.
I didnt have much religion all during the wa r  and after the war  oh God  I was bitter.
In a  a nice lifestyl e where they can learn about more Judaism and being educated in the Jewish religion and learn more about their past  per se  I mean not so much what happened to as as to  more to k now about Judaism.
My religion was catholic   and everything else was true on those papers.
But anyway  so that grandm -- so -- so Martys grandmother was anti-religious  so her f -- his father didnt get any religion because his -- the father of -- her -- his gran -- Martys grandfather  the father of his father  was a wonderful guy and he wasnt religious in any way  either.
Her brother and her were sent to different orphanages so she didnt have any background of religion But she had a brain and the book.
Their own religion  because I dont think -- I dont think there is a justification for all those killing and bombing in this world.
And I -- as far as throwing away some of the -- the shackles of religion  I -- I was try to replace them by something more meaningful to me and more positive.
Interview with Norbert Hilsberg August 12  2002 50 Has your view of religion  of Judaism changed since your days in Vienna?
ML: Because we are so far removed from organized religion that it never occurred it -- to us.
Was it a Jewish school  or -- It was -- yes  that was the reason they sent me away  in order to go to a Jewish school.
And I -- I think it came with the realiz ation how much antiSemitism is connected with Christian religion.
Th ere was something -- I don't know what you -- you know  what I had -- the worst -- the worst things that I had -- worse -- is religion.
33 I can tell you that I lost my religion in Te rezin because I was praying for my friends and nothing happened.
Are you like your parents  or -- Well  my husband came from an o-observant home  and I learned  in my hiding days  about religion.
There is a Jewishness that -- that you -- you might be an agnostic  but there is something more than the religion.
And all through law school -- at the time  Larry  of course knew what his mothers background was  but his mother would tell him that basically -- she basically had -- had given up on religion  although his father wa-wawas quite committed  because she -- and this is Larrys -- Im paraphrasing Larrys words  she felt that -- that God must have given up on the Jews in order for such a thing to have happened to her and to her entire family  which was lost.
I went to school there and I went to Jewish religion there also.
I don't think so but I didn't know much about being Jewish either.
And so  in your world But the Jew Jewish populace  in that whole area of   I knew only from yeah  this this Whats her name?
Our parents were Progressive Jews  very much interested in Zionism and also attached to Judaism through religion  but certainly not of the Hassidic type that was prevalent in Poland  in between the wars.
If Im thinking about it now  my conflicts were not over religion  but over two different worlds; a German world  and an American world; German family  and an American family.
I uh I came to New York and to Chicago to...uh there was Jesuit priest in uh Chicago to have a publishing culture  religion newspaper monthly  so I was working in office and there was work for me for one month  but uh I want to see my aunt in Connecticut so I came to Connecticut and I stayed uh in Connecticut  still in same place in Connecticut  Derby  Connecticut.
I think they respected any type of religi on  as long as it was religion.
According to our religion  also  we have to be buried in shrouds  white shrouds.
What is it that  how did your p arents live their religion.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 25 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: Germany or every occupied country  had on the front page a report from the front.
And how do you see your experiences  what you went through during the war  having affected your -- your own interest in religion?
Well  i-i-in one case I was proud that I am Jewish.
I think that the relationship USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0018 49 that you had with your parents and the relationship that you had with your religion.
Nobody has the right to kill  annihilate other people because they are a different religion or different race  or they look different  or they talk different.
I mean  that was way before -- before the Nazis  but nobody was religion.
And if there were 10 families  then maybe they had the because Je wish are invol Jews are more reli religion  even when when its forbidden  than Catholics or Protestants.
I th -- I think the only -- the only thing which affected me  I would say -- but I would have never  ever changed my religion that -- al though the question -- so maybe  you know  more -- being more active  rather than a -- than m-more -- you know  than just saying yes  Im Jewish and Im going for Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.
It's ve ry hard for parents to explain because we believe in a different religion or we belong to a to a synagogue rather than a church that 2 people don't like you.
>> Bill Benson: And under the Russians you were not permitted to practice religion anymore.
But I could  I  I  Judaism still is the most attractive religion to me.
The only area where I didn't follow is in the religion.
It shows on the aged piece of paper where on the line which shows religion  there's a sort of faint uh piece of  faint piece which shows that the the change was made there.
I mean  its unbelievable how thos e things remain with you  and -- and think  if people were free to do that  they should be so happy  not to be persecuted  not to be -- or looked upon as strange  or -- and I owe that to my parents  to teach me early  early  the power of oppression  then some people gain  through a contro l of part of religion  and so many have done that  so many religion have done that.
I am a German  I am a Jewish is my religion.
But  you know  that religion was a private part of your life.
So they used a lot of German Jews  who -- for that purpose.
And um... Not just religious  uh from the point of view of religion; but culture in the same times.
Religion was a very strange situation because my father and mother were both Jewish racially but had never  ever been in a synagogue.
But I was a Jew  and I was registered with my brother in the Jewish community  and I wa s given the ri -- Jewish religion at birth  and so was my brother  so there was no ques tion  and the Gestapo had all the papers.
And this was going on between  between different religions  between the Christian religion  the Jewish religion  they used to go out and identify who is Jewish and who is not.
But the good thing was that one of the hours of the two hours in school was a -- one was priest  there was a priest teaching religion and the other was more general.
I was told  by my future wife  that you cannot be very liberal anymore with our religion .
I had -- Well  I was never religious  but I had religious background  I knew about religion  I knew the Bible backward and forward.
And if -- if -- if one of them would marry out of religion  this will be the worst thing for me  I dont know if I could survive it.
Several of my parents friends  when they came here  remained whatever religion they converted to  and raised their children  whatever they were.
Which is why theyUncle Norman was a customs official in the British Civil Service  but he was interested in religion and had studied relig ion theology  and in fact he was a doctor of theology which he ne ver  never talked about.
Did you have discussions with friends of yours that were Jewish  do you remember them being concerned  or their parents?
And each religion is one of those ladder s. Now  this coming from a nun.
So do you think that in s -- that because of being in this household where it was more religious than you grew up  that you became more identi fied with je -- with Judaism  or its just that you were -- it was clear you were Jewish and that was it?
The minute they found out the religion of Moses they rejected him.
And I practiced the Christian religion and will  but I do both now.
Do you have a -- a strong sense of your spiritual life  or r-religion and is religion an important part of your life?
Did you get did you go to synagogue  did you get religious instruction?
My parents were not  even though they were educated  in the religion  in Jewish faith  they were not really practicing Jews at the time.
So  then of course there was no time to practice the religion after that whole incident because we weren't supposed to be Jews anymore.
I mean  theres Catholic  and  you know  no matter which religion  and wa -- one of the -- one of the sons was a Trappist.
I was proud that I was a Jewish and I told everybody that I am Jewish  but I didn't practice the religion.
In other words  I looked at religion more of a -- as a crutch woulds -- like someone -- I see some people do and I didnt want crutches.
First of all  the housing was -- religion was import -- in the housing  for the housing application.
As far as the school was concerned  I think we could go to school for a little while  but then  again  there was an assembly and we were told that the Jewish kids now had to leave the school and go to a -- a Jewish school  and have be separated from the others.
We learned in Jewish language  but we studied Hebrew and we studied also secular studies  not only religion  but secular studies  too.
And religion has remained to this day  certainly an important thing  important core in my life.
I mean  well  again  as you probably know  German Jews tried to ma be very low key  be as un-Jewish in a ppearance  not that we were ashamed or you know  of being Jews  we were conscious Jews  but we were Jews in religious observance  not  you know  it was not an ethnic group ot her than by designation by the Germans.
Really  I think that -- its one of the questions that I think I saw in your notes  about religion.
Then comes my Gra ndma Sarah  who was widowed in the ‚30s  and this is the mother of my mother  and sh e was a very intelligent woman  and a very educated woman  and when she married my grandpa  Leibush Tannenblum  she became very  very religious  and anything about religion that I know is because  in katshrut   in observances  is because she always wanted to know how much I know about being Jewish and leading a Jewish life and she was always teaching me whenever I was coming for a visit.
I was not...uh...uh...it was half religion organization  but a funny way.
These extremes and how people talk about their religion and how the rest of the United States should follow certain precepts because they belong to one particular narrow world view.
But I -- I think it were -- they werent just Jewish.
Finally we were able to find an organization which brought over three thousand refugees regardless of religion  and this was the Tolstoy   the granddaughter 9 of Leo Tolstoy had an organization bringing refugees over and uh by the Tolstoy organizations we were able to come to America.
Praying  blessing over the bread  rest according to the code of the religion.
I'm thinking of my brot her who is really an exceptional human being in that he lives his religion.
But I think it was both  it was the war in general  which all the children  Interview with Arlette de Long 25 everybody in my time suffered from  and it was personal in the difficulty of being a Jew and having such strong identific ation with -- with a man  with Christ  with a religion which basically also doesnt exist very much; its an idea in my head.
Uh after a certain while I lost that job because there was a conflict between and the and the and the which was doing this kind of work and uh then I was uh uh handed over to another fellow who...as a welder...uh the German meister who came from Saxony and he was a first class worker  but his religion as you have it very often in in Germany...his whole religion was work.
That in making it the national religion of Rome  Constantine basically had to absolve the Romans.
I dont know how much you know about Jewish religion  do you?
This was ma -- now  of course we a little bit we are out of -- separate from religion  it was -- in some ways it g gave us the opportunity to achieve our greatness  actually Jewish people are great.
And a magnificent phrase of hers  I think it was in response to a question  and -- and her phrase was  the relative relaxed attitude of the Sephardim towards religion.
When you were at this school  the elementary school with Jewish students  Jewish and Christian students?
My father  for some reason  had quit the Jewish temple  it -- it doesnt mean that he totally abandoned the religion  there -- I think there were some quasi-political differe nces.
The Christians  the Jews were having  you know  particularly the Jews had wonderful theaters  and and and social life  and at in my life   th-there was I didnt run into any anti-Semitism  because well  the my fathers closest friends were Jewish members of the prepe legion police  legion  who fought the [indecipherable] so the I wa religion was not an important part in my bri upbringing.
Wh en I came I was always a Jew  but not religious  until when our son was born and started to grow  I knew that I need to give him religion and the way I feel  I will not help him.
The damage was done  they they had the choice of  you know  or th they have the option of choosing and whatever they ch oose  whats important is they are good people  they are decent human beings and that is what religion is supposed to do  in my view  is make decent people of everyone; the purpose of religion  one of the purposes of religion.
I mean  I all I always knew that my grandparents were Jews  and that my mother was Jewish by heritage .
And [indecipherable] religion  [indecipherable] look  there were some Polish people  theres -- you see  there was an ordinance  that anyone that is hiding a Jew  if the Ge-Germans will find it  they would be executed together with the Jews  the whole family.
But th ey -- he wasnt Jewish  her -- her husband  she was the one who was Jewish.
And we ha d a rabbi who came and gave us a lesson in religion.
When I say there were no Jews  that I know  okay?
>> David Bayer: When I was working for the irrigation canal outside my hometown and stayed in the house  every time I walked out my mother said to me  every day  she said to me  \ Don't forget you're a Jew \  don't change your religion  stay a Jew  die a Jew.
But it says that its a displaced person registration record  which which shows the registration number  and my mothers name  place of birth  religion  the fathers name  mothers name and last place of residency in Poland.
I mean we  I dont think we were even particularly aware of what anybodys religion was.
So when man let one person  one person's religion  if you -- I want to call it a religion  because he believed in it  in Nazism -- go as far as it was worded to let destroy people and destroy their offspring and so on.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 29 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: before the Germans came.
Well  I never denied that I was Jewish  my Jewish identity.
Did you become religious when you got here or yo u never have ?
If you put on -- like in Europe you have to put on Jewish  or religion on a -- on application.
I think that the Jewish religion in  in comparison with the Catholic religion has so much more positive.
Well  it was considered a regular public school   but it also was clear that the public school was segregated into -- aro -- along the line of sex and relig -- religion.
So Im not exactly -- but some -- but religion really doesnt play  or never played a big part in my life.
Are there other things  either in terms of  you know  your career  work  f -- religion  other family issues.
And the decree was that no -- that all the Jewish children had to go to the Jewish school -- to a Jewish school  or a school that was set aside as a Jewish school.
Was it a Jewish school  or No well  yes and no.
When this was over  the Polish Jews would get together...not the Jews  the Judenrat Polish.
Now  you were not terribly religious  although you observed certain holidays  prior to the war?
So I probably know as much about the Ca tholic religion as all the kids that were being prepared for their First Communion.
And we did comparative religion  and we did study of the Torah and so forth  wi-with Rabbi Philip Bernstein whod been a -- a chapel -- chaplain at -- during the second war.
I-I da -- I need proof or something  but I believe in the -- I can understand why people want to go in religion if religion helps them to -- to make th -- to let them have good life and help them in other kind of things  I wont oppose to that.
Uh  a lot in  in my  my personal view  a lot had to do with religion.
And they were from a family of learners and rabbis  and -- very  you know  in the Jewish religion very important.
During the war years  was religion at all important to you?
The entire Jewish community here  as far as I know and I saw  was very much interested in what was going to happen  because many Jews ha d already gone to Palestine at that time  and they did not feel safe in Palestine  and they did not know what would happen  the 21 Arab states would be poised to to break Palestine and not to have peace with them  you see  ev en though the Jewish community in Palestine  and I know that  offered any person  whatever nationality  whatever sex  whatever religion  to stay there and they would live in peace.
The German birth certificate  then and now  there's a line item about religion.
But the majority were not Jewish  but there were some Jews.
But  at the same time  if you know the real life in all the European countries  Poland was pretty free [indecipherable] as far as the religion is concerned.
Now was this -- was this kind of thing fairly typical of the Jewish community  the kids were going to a public school  not a Jewish school?
She held on to her religion; she held on to her dignity; she held on to her keeping the family together; she held on to knowledge and exploring other area in life  you know reading.
Because would he be alive in 1945  he would be treated the same as Sappearha is treated  because he will be -- he will represent a religion what the Communism was against  the same thing as the Catholic religion.
And I  if I consider myself anything  I am Jewish  and Im not religious.
And and he thinks that instead of choosing the sides between the two split Czech Catholic religion  that they chose the Jewish religion.
But I di dnt like it when we have a subject religion.
There was no separation of religion from the state as we have in the United States.
71 And has religion played a very important part in your life  in part because of -- of what you went through  would you say?
I have a friend  he was an attorney and he rais ed his child  his boy  in the religion.
Catholic girls have a religion  and thats what I dont li didnt like it.
I am afraid to say it while other religion is present.
And -- and a religion like that  believing in a God to kill everybody else who doesnt believe your religion  I dont want to understand  because it -- it cant be a good god to do that.
And by Jewish I have tried to explain to my children  who are not religious  but are a -- very Jewish  I always tell them that Jew -- being a Jew is not a religion.
Whether I would room with a black girl and whether I was Jew -- what was my religion?
And then I continued my studies  I did not want to have the same experience again and I went to the Jewish  the Jewish rabbi school  really  what it was  it was a school to educate future teachers  but it was a high school still.
This is how -- how he is happy in his life and religion really helped a great deal for me  in a way -- that my son was religious because his father died when he just entered college  it was his first year of college and though he wanted to go away to college  but because his father died  so he didn't USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0012 77 want me to be alone  so he stayed home and he went to Queen's College  instead of going away  you know.
And so that when I grew up it was a religion.
So 02:49: there was a big controversy in our mind why we should be so devoted to religion when there was no God to help us.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0034 50 For me  Judaism is a religion and nothing more.
I belong to the B'nai B'rith -- you know  the B' nai B'rith Lodge in town  but most of my friends are Jewish  You know  not all of them but most of them  but we -- we don't really practice the religion.
How important was religion to you through out all of this?
I said -- he said  ﬁWell  then let me -- you know ﬂ he said  ﬁI know your religion ﬂ he said  ﬁand your religion s-states that -- that if it's for the health of your mother  you're allowed t-to have an abortion.ﬂ I said  ﬁNo ﬂ I said  ﬁI am so religious that this part I don't -- I-I-I -- I don't agree  I'm not going to have any-anything killed ﬂ I said.
So  basically I turned my back to religion at this point and I haven't come back to it yet  maybe on my death bed but for the time being  I don't feel the need for it.
How religious was your family and how affiliated Jewishly were they?
Lets first start in terms of religion  cause you had mentioned during -- during the war that you had made that promise to continue -- you made a promise to God to continue with religion  I wonder if youd talk about that  aand how that didnt work out.
I mean  I -- there was no problem about  you know  kids going to different places for thei r religion.
Judaism  if you mean to be Jew  I am a Jew.
That had nothing to do with religion  of course -- Right.
Catho lic girls went to -- went to be taught by a priest  and we had the religious teacher  we had the man who taught us religion  Hebrew.
They all have maintain ed their religion and look  let's face it  we k now when they march into the gas chamber  we could hear the and screaming  .
He -- he found a -- a friend with people of completely different background  and he was very proud  and besides he -- I think it -- because he was very religion  he wanted to pay for his sins  and he look a-at th-this like kind of 49 redemption and this is what I think what -- there were the forces that kept him going and save us.
And I  if I consider myself anything  I am Jewish  and Im not religious.
If there is hatred against minorities because of their color  its the same as hatred because of religion.
They are Jewish  they -- they -- they -- they have their religion  they go to temple  and everything else  they have the Passover.
I just know that  the religion at that poi--at that particular time  the only time that I remember that really played a big role and I'm happy for it today  if this is really the way he felt.
My parents and -- it might interest you to know  they were more German than Jewish.
And -- USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0050 33 Not Jewish as a religious person  Jewish as [indecipherable] people.
But I was in public school  but we had also gone through a learning religion in school  and attended all part of our life was living also a religious life.
You and I went to Hebrew schools where everything was taught in Hebrew.
My kids know  they know there was somethi ng pretty terrible  because my oldest son is definitely  he's completely anti -religious  I mean he  my daughter lives in Israel right now  she studies in Israel and she will got to synagogue  you know  she has her own  the way she does religion is very muc h her own thing.
I raised my children in a kosher home  in the Jewish religion  to the best I could.
So if you can tell me about your - the way in which you were raised in terms of religion.
But thats that has a lot to do with the religion.
Did you did you think it was a terrible thing to be Jewish  or you Yes.
So  yes  we did have non-Jewish friends up to a certain point.
I dont think -- even think about religion  neither one of us.
And even  it -- just like in the Jewish religion  whenever there is a holiday  there is an eeskar.
And yeah  we had gym classes  and we had the religion classes.
I mean I would have to go every Saturday night -- I mean that's why I became even less attracted to the religion.
and when I came there to live with them  he made me take on Lutheran religion  and they both said it was in a way good  because there was a lot in that city where we lived was a lot of antisemitism  and it was better to say I'm Lutheran  and I was Jewish.
But here she is in south of France  in a Jewish place  where she was buried like the Jewish religion.
He knows who he is  what his heritage is  but uh we have never emphasized the religion very much.
I just remember maybe there were Protestants in school  but even Catholic religion was taught in the public schools.
I knew more about  since I was in the convent  and all my little friends were Catholic  I knew more about the Catholic religion than I did about Judaism.
Is it color  is it race  is it religion  is it what?
And Interview with Joseph Koplewicz October 7  1993 50he looked at me and he says  look  I do nt know Jewish religion  but you know  Im not a Jew  but I think that your relig ion is saying 10 men  not 10 Jews.
And  and she told me that a lot of survivors have had a pretty difficult time coming to terms with God and ... Anita Frank 42 [Date not labeled] Page 42 Rabbi Kushner wrote a book ﬁWhen Bad Things Happen to Good Peopleﬂ. His son who died of this  I forgot the name of the disease but its where theres the rapid maturing and then death and he also  he also had asked God ﬁWhy me?ﬂ and also came to conclusion that this  thats not the god of  of really  thats  its not the god who decides you and not you and I  I must say if I were to pick one religion  well perhaps  I find the eastern religions really more acceptable because theyre much less judgmental.
break] I: You were talking about how important religion was for helping you survive S: well all the time that we had been in the camp  religion gave us a lot of strength.
I told them in my own words that if I accept your religion my God's going to punish me and I was scared to do it and I said I respect your religion.
Never I was questioned or  about whether my religion or where I'm coming from.
The same with re ligion  I was not -- I could not conform to the official religion.
When my husband branch ed out into philosophy and religion  I got a whiff of it  and he passed it on to me  and he would be proud today if he would be alive to see me pursue it so vigorously.
End of Tape #6 38 Tape #7 Is religion important to you today?
Just like Islam is a religion of peace  which it isnt.
So I -- I -- a lot  a lot of Hebrew  of course  and everything connected with the Jewish religion  customs and ceremonies.
I went to a Jewish school  you know  I -- it wasnt a cheder or a Orthodox school  it was a Jewish school  but we learned Hebrew much more so than -- we didn't learn the Bible or things 3 like that.
We were modern people and they  the religious people did not like them people  did not stay in the same religion.
You know  you believe in religion because  you know  if a rabbi or anybody else tells you that you...you have to believe in God  so I thought I went to Hell  because I couldn't believe what I see.
And so religion was not very import ant and that always wa s a point of friction when my grandfather visited from Romania.
>> Betsy Anthony: The role of religion  what was the role of Judaism in your life before and then when you came to the United States?
My  my father always talked to me and said go  you know  to the synagogue  your mother wants you to go and all this and that  but he never really di d anything to force me to do whatever with religion.
That was a Russian Orthodox priest who also taught children who were of that religion  though the town was almost all Roman Catholic.
There was no praying but just learning the history of the religion and history of the Jewish people.
Did you become more Jewish because of what you went through?
And how important has religion b een for you since the war has ended?
When I was growing up  I did not know that I was Jewish.
I want to say I am a Jew  I am a Jew.
But it was just still a little game I was playing with myself  but I didnt ge -- consulted anybody else  but -- but needless to say  but I -- I -- I did get USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 119 involved with quite a few girls  and didnt ma ke any difference what religion  or -- I did have one thing I do want to mention.
I often think that if I had a choice  if they would have approached me of course  I shouldnt say this because its my thinking  you know  because I was never approached  but had I been approached to that somebody would want to take me out an d thats all I had to do is take over another religion  I dont think I would have done it.
So... Were you...uh...was your family very involved in the Jewish community?
They did on many applications at that time  asked the religion of the applicant  but it didnt say explain anything.
Thats number on e  number two  when I was translating that same letter  I omitted  I believe one sentence  which I definitely want to repeat  namely  when I say that Chri stianity is a noble religion  which will be here for eternity.
Fought religion  because they felt that religion is -- is opium for the masses.
My mother was chased out because she was of a different religion  was chased out of Russia when she was young.
During these years  during the Holocaust  did religion play any role in keeping you strong  or did you even know when it was Shabbos ?
My father was Jewish  my mother was Catholic  but neither of them really practiced their religion.
Was it a Jewish school  or No well  yes and no.
You said that you werent outside religion when you were growing up  but in postwar years  here in the United States   did you become more religious  did you join a synagogue  did you participate?
When you were growing up  did your parents speak to you about your family background and any traditions with respect to religion?
The fact that you dont have to be recognized as a Jew or Mo rmon  any religion that you can practice any religion that you want to  that you are accepted.
With somebody in our own religion  you know ... So he says to me all right  let's see what we're going to do.
I dont think it was religion that kept my father and mother on.
You mean till the Holocaust or after  because you cannot put -- Not after so much  but I mean you came from a strong culture or strong community in Kovno  family  friends  religion  how much did that influence what you became later on?
What did your parents tell you as you were growing up  about their faith  your faith  about being Jewish?
I was Bar Mitzvahed  I knew some thing about my religion.
An d I think the Yom HaShoah is the most important thing  for any religion  or any people.
So every plac e you look at  to me anyway  from what I read and seen  the biggest disaster in this world is religion.
So before  I'm sitting in front of this big Menorah  Menorah  yes and we talked about how  at some point in your life  the Jewish religion or practices wasn't all that important.
And I will Interview with Al fred Lakritz April 3  2008 137say that I believe the reason I became a lawy er was to spend my life  to ensure to whatever degree I had  in capability of opportunity  to make sure that other people are treated fairly  according to deeds  not according to religion or not according to fate or chance.
ﬂ And they said  ﬁYou should have said USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0049 70 Jewish.ﬂ I says  ﬁJewish is a religion  its not a nationality.ﬂ I had to argue wh-why are people so conscious of what religion somebody is.
And thats why my f -- my fathers family wa s also very strong  and were with this religion  or whatev -- but we stuck to that  and it gives you inner strength.
And he  in fact  writes a lot and talks a lot about religion.
So the Jewish community created Jewish schools  Jewish teachers  Jewish learning.
Yes  we we had a lot lots of Jews   we had religious Jews  not conservative and also the non-Conservative  whatever they call them.
They really tried me to get over to their religion too  but  you know  it was very it was not very pleasant time.
And did they know your parents were Jewish  and what that meant? (
07:11:14 So  religion was important to you throughout all of this?
My brother married a cousin  and he was religious  but my my my sister married a cousin and he was religious  the one in Israel  and they observed everything religion quite religion [indecipherable].
Secular education was stressed rather than Jewish school  but we did have an education in Jewish studies as well.
Well  something was different but it wasn t different because of religion.
I wrote a book called Religion and the Revolution which is kind of comparative religion but I have been interested in the moral issue of can you be a moral human being without being religious and that has interested me.
And poetry and not only  we learned a little about world history because in the lessons of religion we learned about all the poets and what was going on in the Biblical times.
It was like a passport  showing all the details  names the date of birth  religion  her age  and something like that.
Getting back to the Sokols  the Sokols were not fond of Jews  but they let me exercise there  whereas once I was participating in something at school and part of it was putting up a dance  a group of us kids had to dress up in a certain way and we were doing some Czech national dance or Slovak national dance and I wanted to change clothes to get into that special outfit and some Czech boys were there in scout tents and my father was with me so one of them  with great reluctance  let me change in his tent and told us we don't want Jews in our scouts  and Czech scouts did not admit Jews  so I was aware of differences and I was aware that certain things were not accessible to me because of my religion.
I used to go to synagogue  but I really never was up-to-date with the religion.
How did you impart that feeling to your children  about the greatness of the Jewish people?
Have you ever I guess the best way to ask this is  what is your feeling about being Jewish and and religion itself?
It was an  I went to an all-girls school and we had religious instruction once a week.
That is right  that is you see  youre talking about the things that I dont want to denigrate them in any way  but there are the rituals of a religion.
My par most as I remember  my most of my parents friends were Jewish.
When you were raising your children  what kind of religious background did they have.
The Catholic religion has so many restrictions which the Jewish religion doesnt have.
So they had grown up in countries where in countries where in the Middle East where religion and government were completely intertwined.
Do you know  were your parents members of the Jewish community?
Lets see ... Gee  this is really ... I know  they didnt actually tell me to get so intellectual but to me the  w ell actually Nina Ellis did bring up God because she said a lot of people have done some very  very critical thinking about religion since the war.
And I  if I consider myself anything  I am Jewish  and Im not religious.
Even when he scolded me for so mething that  that had something to do with religion to go along with my mother  I sensed in his voice that it was not serious  that he just did it for my mothers sake.
Religion is no longer of an -- any importance to me at this point  but the fate of my people is  very much so.
For the first five years I went to a Jewish school.
Boys would stand guard arou nd the barracks  in all corners  and she would talk to children  small children  about religion  about Christ and that.
My parents had a philosophy in life when somethi ng is wrong  when somebody is ill   you seek out the best possible care at any cost or any religion or any anti-semitism  no matter what it is you will get the very best care.
As I said  it was a Jewish Hebrew school  a Hebrew School.
When we went to our cla [clears throat] in our gymnasium in gymnasium in the first class  when the re ligions religion was one of the subjects which you had to take  and when the religi on subject came up  I mean  th-the class just fell in in in half.
I suppose I remember this even though it was a Jewish school  rather than a part of a regular school.
The other sensitivity that I have is that I became aware of an organization called the Abraham Fund in New York  which is an organization that tries to promote bette r understanding and and coexistence basically  between Israeli Jews and Arabs  in in Israel within the Green Line and Im very active with that  because I think that  you know  having  like my husband said  having been a second class citizen in a country like Poland  one knows what it feels like to be an Arab in Israel  with the same problems of having an identity card  where youre you know  the religion is stamped in and that sort of thing.
And probably there was a Jewish temple  but I did not know about it.
And I also know that Jewish religion tells you that life -- a human life is very dear and should be preserved.
However I survived  not a Jew  but suddenly I felt that I am back a Jew.
But he was also very well learned in religion that -- the funniest thing  cause it was -- he was -- he went to Yeshiva and all that.
One thing  I'll tell you something  sounds like I'm bragging  but being Jewish  every religion teaches the same thing  by the way.
When yet I have guilt feelings because I'm not practicing the Jewish religion  but I really  I only learned about the Jewish religion when I made contact with Christianity.
So were you required to to be the religion of your parents  or could you have decided to go to another class altogether?
Talking about -- about faith  and -- and religion and -- and -- and the influence of religion on prejudice  can you -- can you tell me the role that thats played in your life  and in -- in your own sense about -- Oh  I -- I can tell you as far as the religion is concerned  I personally believe that religions were necessary to raise the standards  the moral standards of the population.
You know  the father and the...and his wife  they were very religion.
Our relationship to God  and therefore our relationship to the world is o the wa y religion claimed all along  although not religion may claim your details [indecipherable] that we have a particular relationship  and we should find out  pa rticularly what the channel by which it moves.
How to get visas for the two couples with him on the application form for a Argentine visa  they asked religion.
And she ate it because  as I understand  our religion teaches that in order to survive if you are very sick there are certain things that are permissible and this was one of them.
I mean  the people were talking about things I had abs olutely no clue about and the teacher said  \ Well  you know  you want to observe your religion  that's okay with me  but I'm not going to help you.
I only stated that I want my children to grow up with the Jewish religion  not because Im so s -- going to the synagogue  keep all the things my faith asks of me  because my parents died as Jews.
And I could claim that it was lost  and I had a -- my apprenticeship papers which said who I was  and I tore it in such a way that the Jewish religion was torn off  but it would have kidded no one.
And in the closet  she had a bag with her white shroud; and she knew according to the Jewish religion this is how she w ould want to be buried  and wanted to be buried with my grandfather in the same grave.
Probably in Jewish religion is very small amount of the fanatic.
Not terribly much really because I didnt know very much Jewish history  but I mean  I had some general education so I knew quite basically that the Jews started there.
Israel  for me  didnt mean much  because I simply didnt had the upbringing or the contacts with that affili -- that kind affiliation.
The-Then later start -- maybe before they arrive  but was not [indecipherable] like a Jewish  like a Polish people  beca use la-later they start divided for the religion  for the -- for the Gypsy  for th e Jewish  for the Catholic  for the -- for the different religion  for the homosexuals [indecipherable] you know.
They were not religious  but they were connected to the religion a nd the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 organizations.
God cannot see people suffering no matter who you are   what religion; I s ays no.
They -- they observed  you know  the Jewish holidays  certainly  but they -- they did make a break with the very rigid  and what they considered  I think  constraini ng and confining religion of their bankr -- background in Poland .
To understand more about the Catholic religion  the Protestant religion in the neighborhood which serves its clientele and it was our responsibility  my mother and father taught us to be together and uh it was  it was a fine  it was a fine way to do it and my father had a hardware store and in the hardware store everyone needs nails and screws  hammers  lawn mowers  it doesnt matter what religion you are  if you need a tool  you need a tool and so I learned a lot about the exchange of inform ation  exchange of equipment tools  um how to make keys  how to fix locks  um l-o-c-k-s.
I w-wanted to know what your feelings about being Jewish were.
Since I was never that deeply steeped in religion  certainly I I dont feel that they should be doing anything different.
But it was a Jewish school with Jewish children and Jewish teachers?
And he re ally was not Jewish according to the Jewish religion  you are what your mother is.
Well  I didnt speak any German  but somehow I objected to it  and I said that I was Jewish.
Why would the people who were l-like me  or better than me  had to -- had to -- had to die because of being one religion or another religion  or -- its -- it -- its -- its -- its a crazy  crazy world.
I never felt that something against Jews in my teaching of religion  what I learned in my religion lessons.
But they  those Christian groups were full of Jews  I mean  I  I belonged to a  a Scout troop when I was 13  and  and there  I think there were 2 Christians in that group  and it was a Protestant group  so that everybody was Jewish  so  we never had this kind of life in France  we never  we never were divided by religion.
About religion  as I mentioned before  I was raised Orthodox  and I always felt in my heart that the Jewish religion is the only practically religion  that you can believe in it  it has a ground to -- to believe in it.
So for this reason I ask what nationality  what -- not so much nationality  what religion and -- and age  and its so you -- D-Do you -- do you find the student s in schools very open and interested?
And then in this middle school we had religion classes  and they were done with release time.
My religion  I would say was transi -- a religious sensitivity  if you will  was transmitted by these two women  but also by the Yeshiva  and by some of the teachers I had in Yeshiva  more importantly.
Well  again  I began to feel categorizing people  bracketing people by nationality  by religion  by color.
They picked them out because they know they're not going to fight back because their religion was so great that you're not supposed to fight back even.
But Israel is home to the Jews  as you well know and someday I really do want to go there and -- and -- and feel the freedom of Israel  feel the freedom of what its like to walk down the street where -- where your people are and you dont have to watch your back because of your religion.
And both your parents were -- were Jewish  and brought you up in -- practicing a sort of Orthodox Jewish faith.
>> Esther Starobin: Well  I had a new family  a new religion because I didn't know anything about Judaism  new school.
So these these conflict and the conflict in his own marriage  and sadly  we would talk I mean  he did not practice any religion of any kind for many years.
Is there something  in your opinion  about religion  say both Jewish and Catholic and Protesta nt and all that  Christianity to group them all  is there something that you think also perhaps perpetuates people not thinking for themselves completely and taking responsibilities?
There is no emphasis placed on religion itself  its just that the reasoning behind this trip  there are three multibillionaires who are underwriting the cost of sending 50 000 students internationally to Israel free for 10 days.
Even if they are church-going and religion loving  and anti-abortion and so forth.
Yes  there were Jewish kids a nd some Jewish teachers too  but.
There was a very nice priest teaching the religion and because I knew how to read  then I could -- the catechism was what they gave us all.
And as a kid I was annoyed that my religion was maligned.
As for myself  any [indecipherable] believe in God  no matter wh at religion  is fine.
Of course  it was the religion  I think  that helped her a lot; because my father died in 1941  and she had the whole load on her shoulders by herself.
So the people dont understand that they grew up in different environments  its just that being Jewish is a religion  you might not even practice it.
When I go to a synagogue I don't really feel very much because it's been dulled by what I think has been the exclusiveness of the Jewish religion as we know it today.
I -- Im wondering what kind of affect the -- the war experience had on your faith  and on -- on your spiritual outlook.
There was Jewish -- there was religious instruction in school  and the non-Jewish children just stayed where they are  and the Jewish children went to the next classroom  and had other religious instruction.
I dont remember my grandmother being -- br inging up religion in any way.
In that club  were I don't know what  were regular people  I neve r asked a person what religion are you.
And then there were non -Jews and we were friendly with them and  in fact  my friends  particularly who is the medical director of the Middleham Hospital in Antwerp  he's still friends with these people that we studied together  so I think the religion was not important there.
Had your war experience an impact on your faith in any way?
We been all Polish people  and all Catholics  I I didnt even one person was another religion.
In between I tried to study in one of the basements Catholic religion.
If I went out from the country  its nobodys business was religion I -- I accept -- if I dont eat this type of food or something  but this is nobodys business.
And so be sure that in the matter of religion  those communists will not be persecuted.
If people there religion is enough  you know what I mean.
But we called our Hebrew teachers  those that taught us religion also a rabbi.
So  28 when the people of the village began to ask my religion  apparently the Lutheran minister got in contact with my grandparents and I was shipped back to the bunker.
Now  this I mention because it -- later on  it comes out that that gave my father and mother a Interview with Eric J. Hamberg 6 tremendous plus because she was in Hitler's sight an Aryan no matter what the religion was.
She did that for them and for for my father and then of course  we were brought up in that fashion until we came to the United States much later  which time all that was well  I wouldnt say all of that was droppe d  I think for a few a few years here I had religious education  and then we sort of drifted away from the formality of religion  and religion not a terribly important thing in our lives.
But my views on religion very -- I love -- I -- I love being Jewish  Im a Jew.
This is a completely different story  that through religion they are fighting be tween themself.
So that reinforced my thinking that I really was stupid and minor  even in the Jewish school I 17 Hakhshara He-Halutz [Pioneer Training] (Hebrew) 18 Agricultural school (German) 19 Religion (German) 10 couldn't excel  you see.
But it was a Jewish school with Jewish children and Jewish teachers?
Going to church  kneeli ng  may not be allowed in my religion  but I had to go for my survival  and he told me this.
So then you started this Jewish school with the other Jewish students?
Ther e are very few  very few that I know  survivors and I think some of this  so close to us and came out of the camps  but the ones that came out of the camps that I know  they all have maintained the Jewish religion and their Jewishness.
No  I couldnt accept the answer and I was very  very much agains t religion  so much so when it came to Yom Kippur  which is  you know  we got to fast 25 hours  we mu -- all we are allowed to do is to pray  I used to eat twice as much as normal that day.
I had friends I had Jewish friends and I had  of course  the state religion  so to speak  in Austria was Catholic.
I mean  well  again  as you probably know  German Jews tried to ma be very low key  be as un-Jewish in a ppearance  not that we were ashamed or you know  of being Jews  we were conscious Jews  but we were Jews in religious observance  not  you know  it was not an ethnic group ot her than by designation by the Germans.
But I'm Jewish and my children are Jewish and my son-in-law is Jewish.
But he is a man who married outside his Jewish faith  fell in love  raised a family  did not really practice his Judaism for many years.
Every every Jewish child  no matter what religion they was  Orthodox  or very Orthodox  had to attend seventh grade in Polis h school.
But at -- again  as I began to find out what the Holocaust really had -- had been  it all seemed -- religion seemed like a USHMM Archives RG -50.549.02*0051 91 farce.
Now  one thing I didn't ask you about is  was religion ever important to you throughout all of this?
In fact  I could not face religion after that at all because I thought I couldn't go to the synagogue because it was to painful.
And we children  we had a frau -- fraulein  and whenever the fraulein changed  they took us to their church  wa -- if they went to church Sundays  and in general we had no -- no religion.
Yugoslavia  all these people  it -- its religion divides them  why?
It took Turkish  the Muslim religion very good with the Turks and they changed the religio n and become Muslim.
He had set up his own business  and this is a town  he was a total free thinker  didnt believe in organized religion at all.
Did you know any Jews wh en you were growing up?
Any religion and yours that made you need to see him again?
Another thing that sort of -- I had trouble with in school was religious instruction.
It never came to 24 their mind that I could be different than they we re as far as religion.
And my USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0017 6 grandpa -- father came back from Shul and took the honored place at the table and was -- had all the respect of the children and grandchildren and -- so that it was always a feeling of religion in their house.
A little later we moved to the synagogue and there also was a school  a Jewish school there  a Hebrew school for all the classes.
So the first hour  the schools  there was no separation of religion from secular activities.
And my father was actually a teacher  then became a teacher in the Jewish school system  in the Jewish school.
Did you become more religious because of your experiences in the war?
In Poland it seems that some Jews looked Jewish to Polish Catholics.
And actually this is the kind of thing that -- that when I was talking to you earlier about sharing recollections of the war year  the pre-war years with my Dutch friend  who becam e the professor of religion at Smith  he remembers when this was being -- this was going on in the town where he grew up  I think it was Breda.
And the other one said her mother was Jewish  her father was not.
When they put you in a Jewish school  were you taught religion.
It doesn't it  it made no difference whether they were  what their religion was  their nationality  I find good people.
I didnt go every day  and Orthodox Jews do go everyday.
And th-the sermons from the radio  that was something else  that was a more Reformed   and open form of religion.
It was usually religion  or how things are in school  and -- yeah.
A nd then one day the priest approached me about baptizing me  and he mentioned that I ne eded to have a religion.
He completely and definitely he knows where I come from  and as of religion  hes far away.
But also  after the war  of course  nobody practiced any religion.
No  it was not a religious family  my father was not religious.
But I myself  I was very  very much into the religion.
But here he was  told me  very logical  ﬁBerlin is the capital of Germany  so youre German.ﬂ And so in answer to your question  its a desire to belong and a desire to be among people who accept you for what you are  not ask about your religion or anything else.
I was very good friends with -- when I was at Prinz beeterman  pe-people of Catholic-Polish extract  I mean di -- didnt talk religion  religion didnt come into it.
Is there any connection between this strong belief that you have and this -- or this knowledge that you have of somebody wa tching you and -- and your religion?
But Ive had a happy life  I worked very hard all my life  but I had a happy life in the U.S.. Relations to Judaism  so very gradually sort of cooled off in the sense that  I have good Jewish friends  but I dont have any ties to the religion.
She's my seventh daughter  and she knows as much about our religion as we do  and I want her to live.\
In my -- my -- from the [indecipherable] of my father  they weren't religion.
This is really  I think you will agree  it is the mo st important event in all the religion.
For the first five years I went to a Jewish school.
It doesnt necessarily mean we we we have to leave our religion or our whatever we believe in  but we also acknowledge what others believe in  we dont fight them because of theyre they are different in certain respects.
Because I didn't know Judaism is a connotation with a religion  or anything else.
There was Jewish -- there was religious instruction in school  and the non-Jewish children just stayed where they are  and the Jewish children went to the next classroom  and had other religious instruction.
And we had a wonderful time and I met a lot of young people there and we exchanged cards and I never asked them  ﬁWhat religion you are?ﬂ and they didn't ask me  so I had a lovely time.
One case its just a religion  and the other case its religion and race  or ethnic identity.
Nobody ask about religion  or where you came from  or was was not the subject to talk about.
And I felt that at one point that religion is religion  and we play pray to God and at the same time it's also safe to go Sunday to church  and I thought to myself that I'm gonna to pray to God.
We can't stay in anyplace das because the prosecution was very  very  hard against the religion.
And my mother wasn't very religious  but  you know  I studied religion in school  and I remember lighting candles Friday night  and I prayed every night when I was a child till age 14.
Knowing  learning from the catechism  that's the way they taught th e Catholic religion  with the catechism questions and answers.
In -- in Polish army there was  you know  religion  was a p -- the priest and rabbi in all branches.
And I know  for instance  the Orthodox Jewish religion -- and there were these Orthodox Jews on the ship  they have to do things that way  whether its kosher  whether its Shabbat  its a very -- I dont want to say constricting  because the people w ho do it dont feel its constricting.
On the other hand  I think in many ways religion teaches you to be moral.
Did your parents teach you  you said they were very educated in Jewish history and things like that  did they teach that to you?
My religion was mainly the tradition of our people  and we were invited by grandparents for the observant holidays that we shared together.
You know  there is I mean  German Jews considered themselves German.
They saw only one way out of it was through religion.
In Germany  in the  in the public school  you also get lessons of religion  and so the Jews are  just like here you may have to  but you do it here on a Sunday  or  or you don't do it in a public school  you go outside to your church to get religious lessons.
And so no I mean it was known that they were Jewish by many people and Openly?
Did you ever think about religion  God  in all of this -- All the time.
And Im always surprised at people being able to move from one religion to another  or act in various capacities that they would normally not act.
Now my mother was not a religious Jew  uh but my brother did become bar mitzvahed and once in a while we had to go to the synagogue  but we were not religious really so...but we were very Jewish.
So  now when we're on the Soviet side  they did practice religion but no longer did I have the discipline that my father would ask me  \ Did you pray this morning?\
They were going to church all the time  they read the Bible  they prayed every day and I wasnt used to that at all  cause my parents were atheist  and -- not that they wanted to deny they were Jewish  but there was absolutely no religion in my house  and so -- USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0033 10 And these people were not Jewish  that youre with  or they are?
Now  did you practice any religion in the 40s and 50s  with your son  or di any I was not religious at the no.
Wh en you brought your children up  not just religion  Jewish culture -- how did you convey that to them as they were growing up?
They show...they show what...in religion what Jewish people is...don't like cross and don't like Jesus  and that's what they make the shoes to step on the cross.
And some people who were so-called Evangelical Protestants  they were actually always against the Slovak Republic because they were not only not only because they Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 7  1997 33they were persecuting the Jews  but because they were they were against the catol Catholic religion  against the Catholic hierarchy  especially they knew that the priest actually  of a fascistic Slovak Republic is the president.
Now  when your town was un der the control of the Russians and the Lithuanians  could you continue practicing your religion?
Did you feel more Jewish now than you had many years ago?
15 Q. Were you able to observe ----- your religion at all?
Just keep our religion as much as we can and respect our books and our past  but we were never in hatred  so when the Germans came and since I remember that was terrible times to other parts of Europe.
The church keep -- very often they keep  and I tell you this -- this time  the -- to the church  during the o-occupation  during this time  when it was very difficult to the wa -- Catholic church  come the people from different religion  not only the Catholic  come to different religion because they USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0074 27thought God is one who have to pray to the God this way will -- probably will be -- help us.
I remember some of them were Christian  and so we did not talk about religion.
I hope when you leave this place  you won't see race  you won't see a religion  you will see a human being.
Interview with Ruth Harvey 10 Being three-fourths of one religion and one-fourth of another religion.
Maybe he changes religion  does not want to have nothing to do with Judaism.
I dont like re ligion to start out with  so I dont know when if that happened then  or now  but Im very Im not anti-religious  but I dont I think religion is a very big problem in our world  so but  I mean  thats thats now my feelings today  after bei ng the age that I am  and seeing what I what I see  everything.
And  uh  I give them that freedom  because I am not myself so strong on  on religion  but I do believe in God and it came back to me after the war.
And so we -- we as historians were responsible for putting together a context of how the prisoners came into the concentration camp  by what pseudo-legal means they came into the concentratio n camp  of how the guards were recruited  of what their duties were  and of how their daily duties involved keeping these people in a place where they were being persecuted on the basis of race  religion and so forth.
Not that  you know  not that I wouldnt say I was Jewish  but I think yes  I think I was made to feel Jewish.
Both my father and mother came from very religious family  but I believe when they moved up to Cluj  some of the religion was left a little behind.
These were the uh Jews in Spain who during the Inquisition had a choice either to give up their religion or be uh converted [to] Catholicism; and many of them became converted only in name  and still celebrated secretly all the Jewish holidays.
Jewish school  because it is -- was the Jewish secular school  because we have the religion for -- i-in high school  four years  the religion.
Did you -- and so you -- you did certainly identify with being Jewish?
Police saw him at the window  picked him up  took him away  Presumably th ey ki -- that -- checked the town rather 21 carefully that day to see if there werent any other Jews that were practicing their religion.
I'm sure thatI didn't realize that there was such a thing that even went on because I never felt that they knew I was half Jewish and half not Jewish  but nobody really talked about it.
Tell me from -- I read your au tobiography  and the place of religion in your life is really extremely signi ficant  or maybe its just G od  I don -- I dont quite know how to -- No.
Interview with Maurice Friedberg August 12  2009 80 Except that you were allowed to go to Venezuela   provided you lied about your religion  with the connivance of the Ven ezuelan government  which allowed only white  Christian immigration.
As a consequence  I look at my religious background  and my religion as a historical connection.
Do you see that as as part of your life now  or have you ever had a con a relationship with with Judaism as a religion  or is it just You know  when I when I came to America  I was not religious at all  because my parents  you know.
Did you talk be fore hand about  I imagine you did  about what you were going to do as far as religion?
No  we were not of their religion so they had to fight us and we had to fight them because they were not of our religion.
Do you think that you felt differently or taught her differently about things like religion or being Jewish  based on your experiences?
>> Dr. William Meinecke: So you said you were secular  but did you follow any of the Jewish religion?
Did your parents have any kind of religion that they -- that they were bringing you and Irene up with  that they were -- you know  that they -- did they -- did they bring you to Temple on high holidays or was the -- it really -- pretty much secular Jewish household?
In the -- in -- in the Hebrew language there is really no word that is the equivalent of religion.
You know  and frankly  you know  those were days when young people had very little feeling for religion.
So  you have  I think  about two hundred different Christian religion.
I am German myself  of Jewish faith  and I dont have that problem.
But  she thought religion should be applied to your day-to-day life in a practical way.
What happened to the teacher from La tin  or or religion?
And  so my parents would explain that its one thing the philosophy of a religion  and you take the best of it.
So  he -- I dont know how this came up  but you know  at lunchtime we would talk about things and he came -- one day we st arted talking about religion and I -- I said  ﬁWell  you know  I mean  yeah  Im of Jewish origin  but ﬂ I said   ﬁI -- you know  that doesnt matter.ﬂ And he looked at me  he sa id  ﬁWhat are you talking about  that doesnt matter?ﬂ He said  ﬁThat matters a lot.ﬂ He said  ﬁDo you think  that as a woman  you would have gone to gr aduate school  if you werent Je wish?ﬂ And I said  ﬁWell ﬂ you know  ﬁthere are a lot of WA SP-y women out there who -- wh o do big important things.ﬂ And he said  ﬁWell  yes  but theyre not a lot and that actually  one of the things that USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0043 128 comes down to you  about being Jewish  is that there is  in the Jewish tradition  as in the Chinese tradition  there is a tradition of education.
We tried to keep at home how we could -- and me I was not so happy with that religion in this time.
About  for example  the invol vement of the war: how it was possible that in the name of the same religion they were placing the Austrians to kill the Italians.
Well  I knew that I -- I -- th at I am Jewish  but thats all.
He always said that religion is the crutch of the poor and the church tries to keep them in bondage.
You classify them as Dane s of Jewish extraction or Jewish religion or Jewish family.
My grandfather used to take his hat off in front of church when he walked by because he said every religion should be respected.
My husband and I made that determination when we had our daughter  th at we wanted religion to be a spiritual backbone.
First of all  I had to...I was Catholic...I had to change my religion.
Except our religion divided because it was predominantly Catholic in our country and thats what divided us.
And for this they have to show that the Jews are inferior.
One can go on philosophizing about this theme  but m-my own feeling toward religion is I dont like to associate with any foreign religion.
But this was the -- and the religious [indecipherable] the Catholic  Protestant and the Je wish were state -- the rabbi was a state employee  the state financed  but they did not interfere with -- with religion.
But me we are  you see Hitler in comparison to the Jewish law where you know your mothers religion is more important .
Cause you were -- you said your family was very religious.
Then I used to go to a Jewish school to learn religion.
So this guy turns out to be a Christian American who was a -- who are the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 46 people who -- they are very simple religion  they all speak up.
We had it in school the first year that I was in school  we had catechism in school  which is intere sting because before the war  there was there was religion was taught apparently in schools  and I have this picture of my grandfather teaching Jewish children  and then there was there was a Russian there was an Orthodox priest teaching whatever.
Shes Catholic  because for me it doesnt ma tter what religion  what faith  what race  as long -- and especially my mother-in-law and father-in-law  David was their life.
I respect my religion and I will die the way I am  this was the best.
I always had a kind of a -- I dont know how to describe my relationship USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0027 77 with religion.
And were playing with -- this fellow Horst  were playing in a - USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0064 15 - and he says to me -- me  ﬁMy father said that you are Jewish  are you Jewish?ﬂ And I truthfully didnt know what he meant  becaus e religion never came up as a subject in any conversation.
I was raised in the Refo rm aspect of the Jewish religion.
And he had this enormous knowledge of Jewish history and Jewish religion.
So  it was a -- a life that revol-revolv ed largely around the Jewish religion.
But I  I mean mostly I did not think of myself as a Jew.
So the -- otherwise  my parents were members of the Jewish community.
No  after the war  after the war  after liberated I had to go to a Catholic school and boy did they push religion there and again  thats why in this country  this  this separation between church and state is so important because they dont have that in Holland.
And  but I never denied my Jewi shness so when my grandchildren especially ask me about religion  I say I am a Jew but Im not Jewish.
After I finish the school  I went to the hospital to learn midwife but unfortunately  like I will repeat  I didnt have luck to finish because on account of the religion -- of the Nazis.
Did you see them ever  or did they ever practice their religion?
Uh  religion didn't play a-a dominant role in the sense that we were doing things religiously.
Now was this -- was this kind of thing fairly typical of the Jewish community  the kids were going to a public school  not a Jewish school?
You know  without much understanding of the Jewish religion  you have this 12 year old child  who wasnt given any explanation very much  coming from a religion that is much warmer and softer; it seemed to me much more tolerant of children.
