>> Bill Benson: Do you know if there was any fear that neutral Switzerland might be attacked by the Germans?
It may well have been because I have the feeling these people knew I was Jewish.
Which means I am not afraid to come and say to the enemy on the spot.
>> Alesia Fishman: So people sometimes ask you were you afraid of him  the w ell -known -- >> Agi Geva: People ask me  weren't you afraid of Mengele  talking to him?
Until I go back  I go there  I was still afraid to say.
They di dnt want to put up with  well they were afraid.
And I was afraid that if there was an elderly couple with us our chances would be even slimmer.
And I think we need to stop the tape  its almost -- Yeah.
I dont have to fear for my life  and eventually Hitler will be gone and things will be normal again.
I was so afraid of this dentist and the strap and the pain  that I didnt make it.
They came into the house  they asked me for the people [indecipherable] I said they come later  later  but la -- I couldnt  I was afraid to stay there  so I went back to my sister.
Im afraid we have to st op there and change the tape.
And my mother was so afraid to meet him  but she went.
So we had to dig holes and pull the horses and bury them because we were afraid of an epidemic.
You know when he started--the baby started to talk and understand a little bit  he use to say  'I'm afraid there's a German.
That was difficult to [indecipherable] the police had -- the cops put -- they were afraid of -- a lot of the soldiers had a lot of money.
So maybe -- maybe it's not as homogenized yet as I think  that that fear has -- has been left.
Yes  I -- I was thinking about it  many times  and I was afraid it shouldnt escalate  because that was not normal wha-what he was doing  was really abnormal.
Because men were very afraid of being conscripted into the Russian army  which was 20 years  they couldn't get out.
Every November 9 th  10th  11th  we were always afraid something terrible would happen to us.
Im afraid it falls to pieces  51 and she looks at me.
I don't  don't take any incentive any more because i am always in fear that I couldn't  couldn't do it.
And you said there were incidents of anti-Semitism  even with the partisans?
We didn't even go home anymore to sleep like we we re working constantly  being afraid to leave the place.
I was always  in retrospect  after I worked in the Civil Rights Division and after I was in the service  I always felt a little sad th at the Jewish community was not a little more assertive about desegregatio n. But I think the store owners were all afraid to lose their business.
It not only was you go to school  you accept you dont accept and you do accept anti-Semitism  but you get use you cant be afraid all the time .
We didn't grow up to be afraid  that you say something and  and  and it would something happen to you.
They had good reason to be afraid  but we have to remember what the German Army did to the Russian civilian population when they were over there.
Nobody knew what I was doing because we were very much afraid.
Uh we had no idea what  when they mentioned that  German camp  we had no idea that they were so horrible and were in such horror  state of horror as they were.
I said  \ You'll never find us.ﬂ Yes  he went with Leshno into this manager and he was very much afraid this manager when he saw them  but his conscious didn't let him.
Was there a feeling of sadness that you had  or was it fear?
No  but it was ver y clear to me from the very beginning that he clearly was a very bright child so I was a very proud obnoxious mother  Im afraid.
Im not afraid anymore when I go to bed that somebody will come and get rescued out.
We were scared because we were afraid that they would send us back to Poland.
And at the beginning of the war  it looked like there may be an invasion  but I was never -- I didn't  no  I was afraid for my parents  and I thought -- all the time I thought that my parents would be okay.
I was...I was filled up with a lot of anger and hatred and I...I was afraid for myself.
What they did they bombard...they bombard with artillery and with airplanes  but they was afraid to go with the...with the what we were really 20  30 miles away.
To us she was calm  but Im sure she was in constant fear.
SB: When you moved into the ghetto uh  were you afraid?
Would you please escort us home  because we are afraid to walk home alone.\
And because the -- the Greeks defeated the Italians in Albania  we we re afraid that the Italia ns might come there and be vindictive  while the -- the Germans actually did not find significant resistance because many Greek generals were pro-German.
Because we already seen what was going on  that they disappearing; so we was afraid if we not going to run and hide that they...some of them might kill us  you know  for evidence.
Uh there was a bridge to be made over the which was a a river near Auschwitz  and after th e   after we after we had pa ssed the   the SS guards became a little bit more relaxed because they we re afraid that the bridge would be blown up before 14 and they couldn't make it to the other side anymore.
Eichmann 12 Benito Amilcare Andrea Mussolini 13 Adolf Eichmann 15 was after Raoul all the time  but he was not afraid from Eichmann.
Help me to understand something  because th ere are people who  when youre afraid  are you constantly afraid or does the terror go up and down?
Anyway  being prisoners for so many years we were afraid  still  of something  eh we did not walk too much during the day.
The one thing that I wasn't afraid too much to go because this SS man lived in a Polish family's house and I knew them.
Gypsies  who people resented and were afraid of  my parents always loaded with clothes and food and and my mother all the always taught me  give  and it will be given to you.
And wi Russia we knew  we were afraid of Russia because we had a lot of local communists.
They were terrible but in--in uh ghetto  we did not fear the police--the Video Tape No.
And second of all  I was afraid once I go out  they're taking away my gun.
In ‚45  I could have identifications paper on me without being afraid that somebody c -- that Ill -- itll give me away.
And she said   look  here we have protections  we have three soldiers  one was a hi gh ranking soldier and two  I don't know  one was a chauffeur and the other one  and they are sleeping in our house  when we are having our dinner  and we are not afraid.
And -- because we were afraid that somebody can hear it that we are crying.
Did you ever have any fear that if you were very open about who you were about as a Jew  or confronted any authority  that somehow the rug could get pulled out from under you again  that you could be persecuted for being Jewish?
There was Pollacks leaving  and I was afraid to go in.
And so wa-was a the Germans wanted to get even with that  but they were a little bit afraid when the saw the French ta ta to do crazy things  because there was too ma too much sa resistance  too much resistan ce in the woods  and they know if they do something very bad  theyre going to pay for it in fra in the south of France   because in the in the mountains  they cut off the the roads  and they they would have killed a lot of German.
The -- I -- there was still a perceived fear of anti-Semitism in the village.
So somehow when Hitler came to Austria and was practically invited into Austria  somehow it wasn't a surprise because we had always lived with that kind of fear.
And that -- to become Jews  and I would -- I sho -- when I -- would have been a Jew  I would have refused to wear it.
So you were afraid of both the air raid and then being found? [
It had nothing to do with fear  it had everything to do with a sigh of relief.
See  it was a situation that How did you handle your fear when you were doing something like this?
And Ive Ive only been to Israel once  and it was absolutely wonderful  and if I havent recently gone back  its largely because I have ma we have discovere d some distant relatives who want to take over if we go there  and we are a little afraid of that because wed rather be our own determine on our own where we want to go  what we want to do.
In the beginning they were afraid  we showed them the example.
Its interesting  you know  you mention the word anger  maybe there I did feel some anger.
87 And -- and my sister  who was trying to run around and -- and take care of the bureaucracy stuff while I was in the hospital  and getting pass ports  and papers signed  and so forth  broke out into the -- first of all  she had terrible  terrible stomach problems right afte r the war  and Im sure that they had to do with -- well  Im not sure  bu t I think they had to do with all this suppressed anxiety and fear  and trying to walk this delicate line between things.
I was afraid theyd pull me back by my hair  but they didnt  Id say no.
So then we proceeded to go to the big uh  uh  uh the big halls of the factory itself  and of course  there was hot soup  and a pretty good hot soup  and uh we  somehow  subconsciously  we we re not afraid anymore.
And the top of those guys   Im afraid to say he was a brain  because he was crazy.
They were much...they were really afraid of this uh accusation and and and and therefore terribly restricted and restrained.
He used to tell me  ﬁGee  I dont know why I told you I was -- Im going to do it.ﬂ I tell you  for weeks  he was li -- he was walking around like a maniac  he was afraid.
But because of the uh trust that my father had  and this and this here I think I have to pause for a moment to describe this and it's something that I never understood for a very long time  and perh aps even felt  fear  ha d a feeling of of un grudge against my parents for th is feeling of security that they expre...that they had for living in Germany  and I didn't understand it until recent years when I have read many stories of other people like myself who came from German families and where the feeling was exactly the same  where the attitude was the same.
Were you afraid constantly that it-- 02:36:00 No  I was only afraid that if they would stop me I would become nervous and I would show that there's something wrong.
Your parents joyful  having the birth of a son  but in the midst of such circumstances it had to have been accompanied by profound fear.
They kept to themselv es pretty much  we were afraid of ‚em.
And and then you know  getting strong messages that that something very bad was going to happen and it was scary and my parents being scared and just fear  fear enveloping the family pretty much.
I was very  very excited  and I didnt know I had the same feeling she had  that we were afraid  because everybody  her parents and my aunt and the rest of the family said  who knows where theyre taking you?
And life went on as before  and no significant changes of any kind except there was a lot of tension  the fear.
But I was I was alone and I remember the th-the fear.
And Im sure they -- my parents are not afraid of them and nothing clos e to -- very radically happened.
So when we ran away and we came to people  we wanted to be hidden.
So on the roof was a little wall  and I got black material because we got afraid of the money  so we work materials.
And people were afraid  I think  the Germans were afraid that if the fighting went thr ough that zone  then people in the camp would all get out and start trying to find their way back home and then you woul d have kind of a wave of diseased people off on their ow n. And so it was arranged that the camp should be handed over intact by the Germans to the British and with the cond ition that all the people  the Germans who had been working in the camp as guards and so on  would have to be -- would be retained there  wherea s the German Army retreated fr om that area and the British entered without fighting.
This was my biggest fear  that they would come and get us.
So  naturally she was afraid that we bring the lice into her home.
I was afra id maybe his wife will know one day  or his mother...I don't know...I was afraid to do this.
And they were afraid to come out in a way in the daytime even though we wouldn't have done anything.
My father she could  they also were afraid theyd take the old people for killing too.
Did you have a fear that your mother and yourself will also be taken?
But they were so strict about their criteria that the family was afraid they wouldn't let us in  because they really weren't hoeing fields  they were country people and cattle dealers and they did have farms -- ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 19 >> Bill Benson: But not raising crops and things like that.
But I couldnt do nothing anyhow  and I didnt want to start up anything beca use like I said  I was afraid for the job  an-and that guy was a little leader over there.
But we always are afraid to go to the gate because the gates are what you call electrified and we are afraid that they put what you call it dynamite all around the camp.
It was no mo re or less  but we were we had more  we were more afraid more for policemen than from Biebow.
01:12:04 So  of course  this didn't happen because  they were afraid that instead of one -- the truth was that really people didn't believe that they gonna do it.
Well  I cant even wear it any more  Im so scared it will break.
She wanted me to stay but they were afraid and they let us go and this is how I ended up in Majdanek.
He was a nice Swiss boy but I guess he didn't have much guts  and he was afraid to be stuck with eighty patients not knowing how he would take care of them.
When I saw the agent from the landlord outside  I wasn't afraid to open the door because I've known him since I was a little girl.
We are going to send you a Black girl down for you if you are afraid.
I was afraid to make the escape  I could have escaped too  but I was afraid.
So that -- that fear is {Coughs} -- and I have my driver's license -- my driver's license  if you were to take our driver's licenses  my brother's and me were twin s. So my brother never told his wife.
I mean  it was something  you know  he was  I guess  afraid to face the God.
But we were very afraid of hi m because the leader said that so many guns he had that he can kill all of us becau se we was hiding then in the coal  in the cellar.
I don't go to Manhattan too often  but in those days this was the age when I wasn't afraid.
And we couldnt believe her  my sister said  ﬁWe have to tell them we are Jewish.ﬂ And I started crying  and I said  ﬁIm afraid.
We were shipped out and we were very afraid that we would be separated from our parents.
So here we come into Auschwitz  and people  you know  they put us up in barracks  and the beds are made so nice and straight  and everybody is afraid that they would not be able to make the bed.
I was hoping somebody would recognize me in the uh kitc hen because I worked in the kitchen in Auschwitz  and um  it happened twice where some body gave me a little bit of soup  and then one time a little bit of coffee  and I would run back to the barracks  and  and feed it to Christian  but Christian could not make it  she failed me  and sh e died in my arms  and uh  when she died  I put her down  and I pretended she was asleep  and I covered her up because people knew that she was sick  and I did not tell that she was dead for after 2 days because I wanted to have her ration and her food  and I pretended she was asleep  and then I was afraid that they would discover that she was dead  and that she would start smelling  and uh  I told the uh  block eldester  the lady in charge that Christian died  and they uh took her away.
And we came into a hotel with black [indecipherable] and I was afraid to walk out and I was afraid to stay.
But they were very scared of being caught by the Russian Army   the guards.
And by the way  the Hungarians were also retreating because they were afraid to be captured by the Russians.
And then -- It was just  you know  very scary to see the way  you know  the Germans were all over the city  you know.
You dont live with f -- I dont think you live with fear  you live with the -- with the thought of hoping that it will -- it will be over soon.
And we were afraid to go down  you know  we were afraid to from the [indecipherable]  we were not ready  you know -- you know  maybe say something  or turn out to be [indecipherable].
But I was afraid that that was curtains for me at that particular time because I did it on my own.
And why they then moved to Cologne  I dont know  I didnt ask  Im afraid  and -- but she lived in Holland  then she moved as a child to Cologne .
It's not far from here \  he said  ﬁIt was Amelin  was the name of the town there  village  and it's not far from my place and I am afraid the Germans will kill me and kill you.
Y -- I mea n  and are people afraid  or they s -- They may not return to Terezin -- Uh-huh.
But the interesting thing is again  that my moth er was not afraid to have me exposed to a variety of experiences  and then to know at the same time that my -- my Jewish foundations would remain very  very strong.
without the fear  but you know they also have a love for Israel and for  for the way I did.
This gentleman his name was Mr. Losouskas  Jonas Losouskas  had a sister in the country and they  they placed me there because he afraid  he was afraid that it was too dangerous to keep me int he house  that neighbors might talk  and children  other children  you know friends of the children and I was with.
I never had any fear of the unknown  so to speak.
And I felt (you know) free in a sense that I did not have to fear for my life.
So  please  if you have a question  don't be afraid to come to the microphones and give us a question.
Lets say 12 hours a day there was a exch ange each member was taking a turn and there was fear.
I still -- I still have this fear  to -- to -- for you to give me a gun  I would never take it.
I was afraid that if they run into me  I'd be in bad shape because no young people were there  only elderly people.
I do not--didn't know anybody personally that I knew as a policeman but as a whole  we were not afraid of the police--of the Jewish police.
When I took this train  small train to go to Pananitza  every time somebody looked at me  I was pissing in my pants for  I was so afraid.
Came around again with the same bosses  with the same stories and I told them with the same stor ies  but I wasnt so much afraid for the for being the supervisor because I had the section head already Interview with Bernard Pasternak October 22  1997 79taking.
In '38  when Hitler came to power  did you fear that was going to happen to you?
Was there an awareness that eventually your number would be up  that eventually in not too long a period of time 12 that that it would be your turn to be eliminated and and was there fear?
And we were very much afraid that they would come and shoot us right in the house.
I just feared her and I -- I -- I never knew how to -- how to talk with her and -- and she -- she was very possessive of me and I was terribly -- actually afraid of her.
The eyes have to I am very nearsighted and uh they are afraid that if I do agricultural work  if I stoop very much that I'm going to have  my retina is going to uh depart  separate from the eye and they wouldn't give me  they have to have consultations and so forth.
After that day  my fear was so intense  that I did not want to stay with the girls.
Whatever transportation we could fi nd...we wanted to get out of Budapest the worst  the worst way because we were afraid that the Nazis might come back in any way.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 17 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: working places because there wasn't so much demand.
The Germans  when they come in  they were scared of us.
Good natured  nice people  that were afraid of their own shadows.
No  I was not afraid  I was  in a way lonely.
And you see his fear of anyone non Jewish also never left him.
So anti-Semitism was  amongst the Russian soldiers was quite predominant and at that point I was very scared because I was small  I c ouldn't really do a whol e lot about it and the soldiers were drunk  and they carried on and I was really afraid for her life and mine too at that point.
The reason why I didn't want to talk about it is because I was afraid I will talk about it so much.
So you did what you were doing  because the Catholic population  they could not help you  because they were afraid themselves.
Just to keep us close  to prevent any I mean  some fellows could try to escape  because of fear  because of reactions to the medications  or whatever  because the some effective medi cations fire back on them.
They were so afraid that they thought that every survivor that comes in  they have to give up their life  you know.
That we were afraid  but my father assured us that the soldiers and the government is bad  but the German people are straightforward  goo d people  that not to be afraid of the civilians  just the soldiers.
I went there  she took me in  and she said I am very afraid because we are very close  the neighbors  like a row home  like I told you before  one room with one kitchen.
Do you think as a teenager you actually started f -- you know  feeling real fear?
Yeah  you know  but maybe I was afraid the - the -- the -- the man it rightfully belonged to would catch up and demand her back.
I was very much afraid and but what I was hiding behind my sister.
I was afraid I cannot digest it and on the other hand  I break...I break dietary laws.
On the way we were going  the bombs were so great and the artillery fired was so severe  things like this  the Germans were so afraid that they are going to kill them.
We were in a town about 30 000 people and I think about 8 000 Jewish people and Im afraid that Im living evidence that Im alive and people might not be happy about it and Im really afraid of my life.
He said what  you know  he -- he was afraid to talk to -- how come youre not wearing a -- how dare you walk around without the -- a Jewish star?
Because they were the au thority and we were afraid of any kind of authority.
And that was so frightening  that it -- I -- that I remember very vividly.
And my mother asked me what had happened  I sa id there was a Nazi soldier and I was afraid he was going to arrest me  so I ran home.
The roads became clogged with eastern Europeans trying to get back to their homes  and Russian I'm sorry German soldiers trying to run away from the Russian armies going  west and refugees German refugees who lived in Poland and were afraid of what would then happen to them were trying to make it to Germany.
Not to be afraid to ask for help but also be ready to give a hand or to share your goods which you received and you consider yourself lucky.
We were all on our own  and then we heard that the Russians were going to come  that the Russians were going to come  so they had to take Schindler away  because people were afraid that the Russians may not be so happy about him  so they got him out of the camp.
They woul d simply  even if they wa nted to  they would be afraid to do it because they would know that they couldn't get away with it and we also knew that 20 you couldn't even hide in a tree because they  it wa s winter  there were no leaves  you couldn't hide.
Was there no sense that there was no fear of going back to Yugoslavia?
And the last house that we went to before we were caught  they had the big house  they send the maids away because they were afraid that the maids may say something.
Very few people were really afraid because it was daily bread.
I was a fraid to talk now about it  I was afraid about that interview  because  because it scared me to death to start all over and talk.
They did live with Jews for hundreds of years  and I was afraid of them.
Ther e wa s only a fear of being transferred to a different camp.
I am afraid because the mentality of the people is bad.
The fear okay  thats still still still still the same  1940.
Halina Peabody: I -- Suzy Snyder: The fear of the unknown.
Now youre in a free country  youre with your family  you have nothing to fear  and we dont tal -- you dont tal -- you dont -- you shouldnt be talking about it because theres nothing to talk about  finished.ﬂ So  I guess  after that  she was sort of  you know  she wouldnt talk USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0030 78 about it much.
We were afraid for the Pollocks that call themselves Poland without Jews.
There were two families who had known my mother back in Czechoslovakia  who had migrated to New York ye ars ago  and they left my mother about the same age I came  and I guess they must have -- th -- th -- my aunt and uncle came -- came to the dock where -- where we -- where we docked there  and my cousin had just borrowed a ha t from one of the people on -- on -- on the thi -- because they couldnt imagine what was happening to me  and I think I was afraid to get off the boat.
They're afraid for the death  that they're going to get them.
44 A. Because I'm afraid to confront an unpleasant situation head on.
Because she was afraid that it will cost them money to support me.
Wed have blackouts  you know and there were wardens  you know  and I -- I th ink I have -- I wa -- just plain afraid.
It didnt take lo ng though  before this atmosphere of fear set it.
Because he was afraid  he was so scared because the Polacks were terrible.
I was so afraid of her  although I didnt know why and she of course  didnt know why either.
And two is to counter the  the revisionist lies of people who would say that  you know  there was no Holocaust  oh it was exaggerated  it wasn't as bad and then third is so it wouldn't ever happen again and in the end I ask the kids  I said  \ I need your help in keeping the story alive  because we are called the last witnesses and my fear is that once  once we're gone  my generation  there won't be anyone left to keep the story alive  so I'm counting on you.\
But I believe we met with American personnel  and it was the first time that I saw a very tall man  who wasnt my color   and being afraid.
So I put application in  but I still had Israeli citizenship and I was afraid that there will arise a conflict.
So  I mean for my father  s -- being immobilized  first of all because of his -- of his leg  but even because of hiding  you know  when -- even people who were fully functional were -- couldnt roam around the streets  you know  from fear of bei ng seen by somebody  denounced  there were many of -- of this kind of people  in fact  you know  my family  as I know from my brother  were found by Rekanati  who was a -- a Jew  a Salonika Jew who worked for the Germans  and well  he was  you know  shot.
Sometimes we used to eat raw  especially at night we were afraid to make a fire so we were freezing.
When I went all those times to Germany  I was afraid.
I was watching them very careful because I was afraid of the two murders.
BB] I think the collective feeling at that point was to get away from the Russians because we heard rumours that Russians had  some POWs had got down there to the Russians and all the Russians had done is shot them.
Why did you run?ﬂ I say  ﬁI was afraid  I was scared.ﬂ Fear was my motivater.
And this is what happened after communism  and communist fall  most of my relatives and friends who were in Hungary  this was their greatest fear  that what will happen to them now.
I took them aside and told them who I was...that I am 20 really Jewish and I am looking now to get back to some place where there are Jews so that I could get to a community...a Jewish community.
It was always so good  but I knew later that the reason was that she was afraid that maybe 11 there will some blackmail.
So you were and that unknowing  that adds stress too  that adds fear  too.
She was afraid that if they catch me down there  they 'll kill her too.
And th ey sent them and we were afraid it's worse -- in Terezin we heard some rumors where they are going to  but it was so terrible that nobody wanted to believe it.
So  youre f everyones afraid  not the boom hasnt fallen yet  though.
You were afraid God was going to punish you for going into the churc h  not of getting caught by the Polish people?
She still was afraid of me  and I said don't be afraid now.
And they looked very scary  but as a child I wasnt -- I didnt fear them  you know  I didnt know what they were like until later on.
He said not to be afraid  theyll try to help us in every way.
I wa sn't  I would say  the most adventurous because that group of 10 that I was assigned to by Johann Brower  uh  he was born conspirator  he had fought in the Spanish Civil War  and  um  I was afraid of hi m  his recklessness  and I was afraid of the 10 guys I was connected with.
He said  \ ---------------get out and get out and do this \  so finally  I didn't wa nt to upset him too much because he was already afraid  he didn't walk out of the house  he was sitting in the house all day long and praying  praying to God  God will help.
But one thing Im lucky I had the family  because when I arrived to pa to my foster family  how tough they were beginning  and I was very fortunate  because they yeah  I was afraid beginning  because the Palestinians would come to to the village.
Fear  unex -- unexpected can be expected any time  beating  arrest  sending here  there  we didnt know what was going on.
I mean do you remember be ing afraid during the whole smuggling thing?
Did you still have a lot of fear or did you have more hope once your parents went to Italy?
Would were people frightened  did you Well  we were very frightened  we were very afraid.
So he was always afraid of anyone not Jewish as well.
There's pain  there's fear  you know  there's an enormous amount of fear and you start thinking of how  what a terrible place the world is and it's very hard to get up in the morning.
And -- and then when the -- when the British came  they put up a regular kitchen and they -- they made those regular meals  but we were so -- without any discipline and without any  you know and -- and in such fear  all this  that we -- that we will not have what to eat  it was so imbedded in -- in our minds  that when we would come to -- to the meal  everybody would take -- would want to take the bowl with them  because this was a very important tool  cause we were afraid that we are not going to have that bowl and -- because this how it was in Auschwitz  if you didn't have that one cup that they gave us  then y-you would have been starved  because you wouldn't even get that -- that one  you know  the meal USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0012 39 without the one -- the soup what we were getting once a day.
We didnt have anything to do  cause we were afraid to go to other barracks there.
In the meantime  they were afraid they will be called into transport and the children would be left there; because they didn't know what was going to go on.
So it sou so it sounds to me like all this fear that people talk about  wasnt part of what your reality was.
I mean  it never used to bo ther us all that much but there was always that fear that we used to talk about sometimes  ﬁAye  I suppose 23wed be next.ﬂ That type of thing.
So you live in fear because somebody out there is out to pick on you.
Because she was afraid during the day somebody comes by there  so she would be in trouble.
Was very few who helped  and I will say  majority was sympathi zer  but was afraid to do it  and the skunks who were happy with it  I con--I consider them as rotten type of group  group of people  and I cannot judge them  I am not the person who will judge th em.
And then again  I put this thing to work and I said  I have to do it and I'm going to conquer this and I made up my mind I wasn't going to be afraid and then I wasn't.
She had my father I had no fear of my father  I could talk to him.
And its interesting how children perceive different thing and understand  obviously a limited amount  and that s what I was afraid of  and -- Mm-hm. --
Of course I didnt want to go because I– there were so many thousands of people walking around in this attic and also in the whole fortress was a huge area and all speaking all different languages  mostly Czech  some German and I was really afraid to be left alone.
>> Jill Pauly: And I have to say  they were very good about not emphasizing the Nazi cruelty and fear more than the y had to.
There was group of subhumans watching this man  this well-fed  big man with the gun  and he was afraid of us.
My father was afraid that they he will re take revenge against him because he was conducting that investigation.
When you were in Russia   did you when you were in Russia   and you were still imprisoned  did you feel that kind of fear?
And they said  \ You're not going to school anymore \  because they were too afraid to send me by train to   and so they would send   and so I stayed in the village and I went to the school  local school  and I was not enrolled in that school.
I da that 1940  I remember election was in the in the fall  and it was a political turmoil there and and little friction  everybody was afraid.
Instead  for some strange reason that the Germans had  they decided to evacuate the camp and forced us out.
And this is when they started to interview us  and you know  we were so scared that I was afraid even to speak to Americans.
And also  of course  there was a terrible -- I mean this is -- was one of the reasons and I read this again now -- terrible fear in Germany that the Russians  the Bolshevists as they were called  would overrun Ge rmany.
And anyone that ever came brought bad news  or God forbid the slip to go into the transport  so naturally we were we stopped our conversation and we were very much afraid.
But I was afraid that I wouldn't get out anymore if I let myself drop or whatever in the dark  and you don't know wh at is going on.
He was with the Russians  but he was in Russia with the Germans  so this was a very unpleasant feeling for him  and he was afraid so he left the army.
My f ather was afraid to take us because I had a baby sister.
I think I could adjust because I was able to say  ﬁOh thank God there isnt one stone sticking next to the other.ﬂ My mother said  when she came in -- she was -- she had a ter -- a terrible fear.
And were you frightened when you saw the Germans come in  the Wehrmacht come in?
It was just fear fear of something that I could no t verbalize.
Things were happening on the sides of me  I ha d absolutely no idea what it was until I got pulled into the house  and at that time  I wasn't afraid of anything  it didn't mean anything to me.
But to me she is that child  that beautiful 13 year old lean child who evidently knew nothing but fear and love in her - this enormous love for the family and this fear of what Hitler's era did to her and the war came.
They were more afraid -- I wasnt afraid of the Russian.
And matter of fact -- and the SS were very afraid of catching any disease or anything -- so they just glanced through and walked out.
It was...I was never afraid that I am suspicious like a Jews because I was very very uh Aryan type and the two children was blonde Aryan type  like Hitler looking.
Were they mostly of the neighbors  or at that point would you be afraid that Germans might come searching house to house?
Ill tell you the truth  I was afraid that they impose a penalty when I leave Soviet Union   and I felt that wouldnt be proper that I take this diploma.
They hung on to us and grabbed our clothes for fear we're gonna leave.
The train took us to Poland and we were afraid already because they wanted to kill us.
It was a constant fear of what was happening over there.
Because even if a villager had got in his mind the notion of betraying us  he would be afraid of retaliations by the punishme nt by the resistance.
One of the questions often I'm asked is w as I afraid .
It was more difficult  it was mo re tension  because my parents were always very tense  and were always  you know  a -- a -- l-l-l-looking outside with -- they were afraid.
But a lot of people during that period of time died from typhus.
>> Bill Benson: Why did the Germans all of a sudden come in and occupy the land of what had been their ally?
You -- you just -- your whole concept -- I think soldiers in war time too  they are afraid  but they just -- oh  excuse me.
I said  oh  I have a very bad cold  and I cannot I didnt want I was afraid maybe Im not goi ng to be qualified there  and I didnt want to lose a job Right.
The one who you were afraid of  your father was afraid of?
I wasnt so much afraid for my self  but I was afraid for my father.
I remember I was afraid to sleep in my bed because after all...uh...the two  three weeks I didn't sleep in a bed.
And this was star -- we are supposed to meet the man to take us home  my brother said  you know   ﬁWell make a stop here in --in this little town Moladetchna.ﬂ Said  ﬁWhat for?ﬂ ﬁOh  I want to introduce you to somebody.ﬂ He was afraid to tell me because I woul dnt go home.
So my parents had good reasons to be afraid and to be terrified.
They liked to help the Jews  but they were afraid for themselves.
What were you afraid of that what would the police do to you?
We were afraid of the Communist -- >> Bill Benson: Not letting her out.
And then  in September 39  Poland was occupied  and people were afraid of the of the German army  and many people ran.
We were all -- whatever it was  as it were -- we were all afraid.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0007 37 37I was afraid we might have misplaced them.
No  I was not afraid of I was not aware of same sex friendships.
I mean if I wanted to glorify my life  I would probably say at a very tender age  I resisted and fought against Hitler  but that would be a lie  so I was nothing but  as I told you before  it's like a gang  and like gangs fear  kind of resent other gangs and resent the police and resent authority  that's what I did  I resented authority  because to me  authority was negative.
Now  he didnt ask who she is  but she didnt -- she -- he didnt ask  s-she was not afraid in case she wouldnt do it  which they will come to her.
My father did a very much  a lot a lot  but we were afraid to start it  so he remains still his bones there  in his field.
We didnt even know  for the time being we didnt know that there were concentration camps.
They were so petrified of each other  that they were afraid to to to give us anything.
I was strong  but I start cryi ng because I was afraid for Jay.
So all I know is that I was terribly afraid of the Germans.
One of the last sessions -- recently I had to go back to him for just the one session  because I have interviewed a man nearby here  USHMM Archives RG -50.549.02*0051 97 who had been in Auschwitz with his brother  and the story was so terrible that I had nightmares overnight  wh -what happened to him  happened to me during the night  and the next morning I was crazy  I -- I couldnt clear my head  and I -- my wife said  ﬁYouve got to go see -- see a shrink because  you know  this has been too much of a thing.ﬂ And I went back to him  and we tal -- and he helped me immediately  and we talked about it  and he -- he explained to me why it upset me so much  because it was -- this man had been with his brother in Auschwitz  and it brought all my war stories back  the danger  and the fear with my little brothers  and -- and I said  ﬁYou know  I never talked about the Holocaust with you  did I?ﬂ And he began to laugh  he said  ﬁYou did nothing else.ﬂ He says  ﬁYou did -- you did all the time ﬂ he said.
Did you have a di -- slightly different opinion  or did you approve of what -- Yes  there should have been fear  because th ats what I witness -- I lived.
>> Fred Flatow: Well  while I was in Konigsberg  I was always afraid.
And I looked at the man  and I called Shep Saltzman aside and I said  ﬁHes not a rabbi  hes a spy.ﬂ He said  ﬁWhy in the world would you say that?ﬂ I said  ﬁWell  hes clean-shaven  he do es not wear a skullcap and he speaks perfect German.ﬂ Anybody  when you hear that German in back of you  you have fear.
In the second place  the few people who were interested were afraid to hear ster -- and still are  still afraid to hear stories about concentration camps.
But took awhile to -- to realize all that and that I was not afraid to -- and that Im -- to say that Im Jewish  came almost -- within a -- within a very short time.
I was afraid to read there in the building  I used to go around where I didn't see people.
And I was not allowed to show my face  but they were afraid that they might kill me.
I really wasnt that much involved but I remember my mother like saying that we were afraid of the Romanians and yet they didnt do anything.
Otherwise  I would...some stranger comes into this place  I would chase him out  being afraid myself.
They were so afraid that maybe I will not get those permanent visas  they were holding my ha nd in the airport and I reassured them.
So  we decided to get off the road  and just managed to go back - to walk back  but we were afraid because this way where we were going west  nobody could - nobody was suspecting us of running away from cam p. Were running away to the west where all the Germans  you know  with all their possible treasures that they had.
Pe ople around me were a wreck filled with fear and dread and I must have taken that in as they say with your mothers milk even though there was no mothers milk.
You're half asleep  but you're afraid to lay down because you get tramped by others.
I really was afraid; you know that he might assault me in some way.
Everybody was livi ng in fear because it was terrible. {
The thing I expressed in my book  a feeling of constant fear.
Im going to st ay there  and you go wherever the flea b -- flea-bit hotel.ﬂ So sure enough he went there that night  I told him we gotta meet for Interview with Alan Kalish October 24  2003 122dinner over someplace  and he was afraid to order anything half decent.
I  having his assurances that this  the call was genuine because I was afraid to go in the middle of the night  I uh...the man who who had come for me was a militant from the militia  Ukrainian militia.
I-I didnt care  I was afraid just for more beating  that I couldnt take it any more.
Was there a fear of even being on the streets at this point  or were you able to move around?
And there was some times such a underlying fear of certain things which I as a child could sense and it had much to do with anti-Semitism.
I didn't go too much out  but when-when I went out I was not afraid.
I didnt realize what it will be  and if somebody said theyll go to kill us or what  we didnt believe it.
At that time  do you remember  did the people fear the German at that time?
High school kids are afraid to ask in case its the wrong question  the other kids will laugh at him.
She was diluted so much to such an extent that in some ways  I felt more abandoned than during the war  even though I wasn't afraid for my life.
My  first of all  I was te rribly afraid because I had left my home  my mother had said run.
So  therefore people were afraid to do anything or say anything and this is how it went day by day.
And those girls had very hard life because they were afraid that somebody will denounce them .
But later on my father said that he was afraid at first that they were going to throw a grenade  because at first we thought there were Germans  enemies.
And so  three weeks I was in that hospital  in isolation and I did not sleep and I did not eat  because I was afraid theyll kill me again.
And he get so excited and tears are in his eyes  and behind he had a bouqu et of flowers but he wa s afraid to show them because she told him the baby mi ght not live  and he thought ma ybe it was a mistake.
And then my father told them that he's in the partisans and they had to take care of me.
Again I would have to go to the bathroom and I was afraid to get up and go.
But  the non-Jews  so there was no place to hide and they were afraid to hide us because if theyre gonna find us then theyll go where we are.
Do you think you were afraid because you we re alone or because you were vulnerable  because you saw how vulnerable  or was the two of them–?
And my father always was afraid of them  because they spoke English and they were the strangers  they were them  you see?
But we had that perfect argument  of course we had our apartment in Berlin and as I mentioned earlier  the addre ss that we gave  the fictitious  there was actually a Hermann Hesse living there  so so mebody could check us out in the telephone book and we were there only for fear of the air raids.
They didn't they cut that out  I mean  they were afraid to deliver  the neighborhood was changing  shooting and stuff.
When you were a student  and you were afraid tha t your father was gonna punish you for being a bad student; now  then you we rent aggressive.
He start to bless [indecipherable] I got afraid  because I shouldnt do this.
And we were very  very afraid that they going to kill us.
We were in   we had to leave there and hide.
So we were so afraid that maybe something is wrong  maybe they will send us back  or something.
I knew more English sooner than I realized  and I was afraid to express myself.
No  no in the beginning before they did what they did we were not afraid of them because it was the regular army and they were not bad  as bad  but then came the rest of them and that's when it started.
He didnt Who was who was afraid there would be revenge?
So that was -- we were always afraid of the end  even though we were in Terezin  the end was for us a mystery.
But then this Russian came and we were scared of them.
Expl ain to me about how big your family was  and how you  how much you knew of what was going on  what fear you had  and then what you decided to do with your child.
But from just watching everybody around me I mean I could see this incredible fear of everybody that of being discovered in that  in that hiding place.
We were -- we were in the Hanover barracks when we arrived  till I got to the kinderheim  which was L fear hundred -- 414  the German kinderheim.
But he was all the time afraid that h e was put there because he was an Iron Guard  so after a while we start to talk and I start to talk to him  and he told very vague  not in detail  that he knows his past  he regret it  make a big mistake  and he want to pay somehow and want to help the movement.
There are a lot of i-in the forest and they can kill you  because they are the ones which are afraid now To come back.
What it was was a fear of the Greek -- of the war that was coming very close to Greece.
I was afraid to look at Christiane on top of that pile.
When I came -- yeah  when I came  because everybody was afraid then.
Yes  in times of desperation you pick up strength you never knew you had and courage or you die from fear or else you turn the other way around and you become extremely courage ous.
There was no real fear but  again  we had to be very careful  they had to be very careful  that nobody betrayed us.
Maybe a lot of Germans  well they didnt like to do it either  but they had such a fear of not -- to become in -- the same prisoner  you know?
They were even th-the goyim  the non-Jews we re afraid to communicate.
We were ver -- very afraid if the Nazis will come  if Germany will come here.
Now they couldnt -- at night they were afraid  we controlled already that time the -- the woods.
And I have to go to work tomorrow  and I am afraid.\
You know  we were so afraid of that dog  that somebody will notice it.
From what they told me is that they were told that they were goi ng to be sent somewhere else and they sort of smelled a rat and they asked for one day off to come in and say goodbye to their children or visit their children and then of course they ran away to Nice during that supposed trip  but they didn't come to pick us up because they were afraid.
I was just not afraid  and Ill tell you  since I was the tallest  there was always a risk that whenever there was a selection or they looked for somebody to work for a job or whatever  they would always - always - even if I was in the back.
It was quite an experience  and I was I was frightened.
And even American Jewry didnt do anything  but on the other hand I understand they were afraid of a Interview with Eva Kristine Belfoure February 2  2001 173backlash.
And everybody laughed and I laughed most hilariously  you know  but inside  you know  the fear was gnawing on my inside  you know.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/ETA HECHT page 17 Interviewed (5-5-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: because this was a colleague of my father's and he knew exactly where I was but I  I think what happened his  he felt in case this picture would be found by Germans  that of course they would be able to locate me and also I realized  I got very emotional when I found this picture because I realize how hopeless the situation must have been that my parents felt that they wouldn't survive and so whoever would find this should send it to my uncle so that he could you know find me and take care of me. (
Okay  like on Christmas and Easter we would be afraid to go out  we kind of  even during the Romanians we kind of didnt go out too mu ch because we were afraid of them  the Christians what they would do.
And I wouldnt stand at the window because I was afraid somebody might spot me.
But it it was a way of telling me that you could say what you want  without fear.
He said  \ Well  there's no room ups tairs.ﬂ I said  \ But I've just got my little satchel  and I'll...I'll share Eddie's locker.ﬂ \ I 'm afraid you can't go up there  Marty.
I didnt know how to start a business  how to run a business  how to buy and sell and maybe I was afraid that someone will take advantage of me.
And those nights when he came back like that I got terribly scared because I was afraid.
This he trusted  because he was afraid the authority will know that selling on black market without the points [indecipherable] you know.
Oh  we were so happy to -- to look at them  how afraid they we re of their lives  yeah.
And and I remember yeah  I remember a lot of fear.
>>Rae Goldfarb: Not being afraid that somebody will shoot you in the back  or in the front.
But she was afraid of him  too  I suppose  so she was ve ry careful.
And I was awaiting that result in this apartment  Frau Pegello  who after awhile warmed up to me  and wasnt afraid of me any more  and Frau Pegello always told me  Fraulein Fisher  Miss Fisher  I am an old lady  Im over 90  I have seen a lot.
And they were afraid if they displeased them  it would topple their government.
And then I was -- I always had a fear for heights  so I went always like a dog  over the mountain -- the Mont Blan  for instance.
The monastery was really a  an experience wh ere  where there were good things too  you know  uh  believe it or not  (laughs)  my first sexual experience occurred in the monastery  not in the monastery grounds  but in the  just outside  because there were girls there from nearby who were quite interested in the boys from the monastery  uh  there were constant fear  however  of being recognized as a Jew.
But this difference that  you know  my predecessors had the fear of religion  you know.
because a lot of people were afraid to take the chan ce because they might be killed.
And a-at that time I was of -- felt more Jewish than I had before.
He was afraid of his own shadow and I took over. [
But I was a little bit afraid  to be truthful  cause he was quite a big dog  and -- Really? --
And did you feel he was being aggressive  or you were afraid of him  do you think?
Well  we were afraid that we weren't going to see him anymore.
I was walking all the time  and I di dn't know where to stop  so I was afraid.
Was there a fear during the day that you might be hurt or that when you came home from work something might be wrong with your family?
It was that -- that fear  you know  was -- was very palpable.
But that first -- first experience  being separated from my mother  who had to go to work because my father was in the hospital then  and being alone  and being mistreated  when the war came  and the whole thing started all over again  the loneliness  and the danger and the fear  I think it all accumulated.
They had been scared  the Germans didnt trust the more intelligent people.
Which I hope are never repeated but which I fear are being repeated.
You can imagine how she was crying when we were leaving her  but anyway I left her there and I traveled for six weeks  back and forth from that particular town wh ere there was the lumber yard...I didn't work there in the lumber yard already...I was afraid to be caught and what would she do in the hospital and the child in sanatorium.
And then she si -- this dog barked at her and she jumped off my hand and scratched me from here to here  whic h she never  ever did  from fear  and she went back to where we stayed  the farmers told us that they saw her.
But that was -- I -- I was very scared  I -- Ill admit that.
Do you ever remember feeling afraid  wh en -- you know  this guy has a lot of power  he could arrest me if he felt like it.
I think they had so much fear in them  that it was beyond belief.
You have lived under Russian occupatio n. How did you feel about the -- in the early 50s when the -- the fear and the hatred really  of Communism was very great in this country?
And...uh...then...uh...(sigh) how much she tried  you know  to be nice to you  but it was not...she was afraid too  you know.
Is there anything that stands out in your mind from the -- the pe riod of time toward the end of the war and immediately after the war was over  what -- what stands out in your mind about those days aside from your fear?
Here  the Nazis were afraid of the underground activities  of the Russian front approaching and everything  so they came to th e conclusion that they ought to take and break up the Polish work details work units and bring some Jews in for them not to be as comfortable and not to be able to do the work that they were afraid of  as far as uprising.
There was danger and I knew there was something very bad and that the Germans -- we were hoping would leave.
Th ey  they were their servants  were there  they were toying with us to their  to their delight if uh  uh I'm just going to use an example  I was being punished one  and the punishments was that I had to kneel on the stone overnight and the German would walk around me  they smiled on me all night long  and I had to stand erect  and  and it was raining because uh  I was  I was a daredevil  I mean  I wasn't afraid because I had nothing to you know  I didn't have second thoughts about it  I wa s stupid.
And I  Im afraid that this  she  because of her own miseries  she projected a whole bunch of her anger of me and I had been sort of the good little girl.
I didnt think about my parents except in the expectation that I would see them  that this was a temporary situation and that they would eventually be coming.
I was afraid as often as I entered a restaurant or something  because people were going around so much in th e war.
Well  I look up and there was the soldier  but that was more as a  you know  I thought I probably felt good about it because he was going to protect me  you know  whereas everything else was naked fear.
One of the thing th at struck me in -- in -- in the video interview that I watched  you said -- I -- I -- I -- I could look it up  but you said USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0018 91 something about -- and it was related  I thi nk even -- in fact  when you were speaking about your -- the gaps in your memory and the things that you blocked out  that you didnt remember a lot of the children  becaus e you were afraid to get too close.
But nonetheless  it was a scene of the most...and they were standing there in  I believe in the kitchen  after having committed the deed  and they hear some...some steps going up and then the door rattling and he is afraid that the lock might...might open up because...uh...this...uh...was just some...some kind of...uh... what do you call it in English?
You can dishearten somebody just by being very passive  ﬁYou dont exist  I see through you.ﬂ Were you afraid?
I wasnt afraid because - I dont know why  but I wasnt.
Interview with John Lang October 15  2010 11 My father always said to me  I always I told my father the last time that I went to synagogue with him that I was afraid for my life.
But they got it a little wrong  Im afraid they they sh I think they showed 88th pilots still on that marker  but it was only it was actually 89 th.
It was the last time in my incarceration that I was subject to that blood-chilling fear produced by an order for Jews to assemble separately.
But my mother was always afraid because sometimes I would be playing downstairs like that and I was bothering someone and they would say  ﬁMadame Garih  Albert is bothering me.
I was often afraid to read Holocaust books  because I feared they would give me nightmares.
Because I  I was afraid that she's going to look at me and  and give me away 11 Sudeten District (German) 25 by glancing at me.
And I  and I dont have any idea whether this is fear -related or whether this related to the war but whereas intellectually Im totally comfortable with making mistakes  emotionally  when people disapprove of something that Ive done or angry with me  it still gives me a pang of ahhhh.
You know  in t -- near -- in the territory around the woods  they werent even afraid.
to a small town  hoping that no one body will go and tell the Germans that some Jews were which is what happened  actually.
But I had a real fear at the time  of being identified a Jew  although I knew it was almost like being a kryptal Jew  because I would never deny that I wa s Jewish  or -- or I was married to a Jew  but there was a lot of anxiety about that  until I finally realized the Nazis are gone  you know  you have nothing to be afraid of at this point.
Do you think that your treatment of German civilians changed  or your feelings even toward German civilians changed?
And for many  many years having lost my family  having lived in so much fear and terror  having felt myself abandoned by my family  by Jews  by the rest of the world  it was probably inevitable that in personal relationships for many years  I would construe a small slight as a rejection and then respond in kind by either more forceful repart ee or by running away.
Just to have more fear than fear  create more fear than fear.
The fear of pogroms  and the fear that Poland is going to be a Soviet state.
Just ya -- and saying to him  yeah I remember her say  ﬁBoitishe Bokha ﬂ have fear of God  and I was appealing to his -- whatever religious  you know -- and they were religious  ironically  very religious  the Ukrainians.
In the meantime  we were scared out of our wits .
But others I said  \ After a few weeks  we will burn their houses.ﬂ See they were afraid to come and to shoot because I told them  \ Anybody who will come up on the attic and he will show his head  I will blow 04:51: his head off.ﬂ So after the war  after the liberation  I invited this Franek when I was a big shot in Krakow  so I invited Franek to come to Krakow  and he came.
She was afraid that -- you know  sometimes -- you -- you know  you -- sometimes maybe -- maybe somebodyll discover.
We kept going  but everybody was afraid that's already  that's it  because we knew that they take you from one place to the other it's most likely that they take you to the gas chambers.
I'm training for the Sugar Bowl Track Meet.ﬂ And  uh  Paul Pilgrim  this mature adult  uh  said  uh  \ I'm afraid you can't  Marty.ﬂ I said  \ Well...well  14 why not?\
All it meant was 29 that they knew that they could come into my camp  you know  with an open heart  and freely  and without fear of being spied upon and told to go back.
We weren't allowed to eat for fear that our stomachs would burst.
Interview with Agnieszka Holland 15 Well  I have on that was going to be my last question  but I have sort of another last question  but it sounds to me that one has to be not afraid to be lonely  to have a double identity  to look for these controversies.
He was afraid that if the Russians find out that he has a brother in the United States  a capitalist  whatever  that he will lose his job because at one point he had a very good job in Poinyavich right after the war  but then somebody said  you know  his father was a capitalist and he has a brother capitalist and so he got fired  because his brother is a capitalist and his father was a capitalist.
Do you think the Jews in this country have reason to fear from skinheads or neo-Nazis?
Were you scared when the Nazis were there  when they took over?
Will I ever be perman ently in any one place and always the fear  you know  of  of leaving but I really had...I I was eighteen before I went back to Holland again to see the Schoutens and it was very difficult for me.
I was going  walking through this park and in this park there were two huge antiaircraft towers from 50  60 years ago from when the Germans were Interview with Joseph Sucher 49 July 23  2014 afraid of bombing from England and these towers like circular.
I was always afraid how are they going to react to me and at the Olympic training courses that I was ordered to attend  they  they couldnt have been any nicer.
I thought that I would probably go to my grave  sh-shaking over a military person  which of course is not the case  I mean  because you know  once you get over the original fear.
By that time we had already become citizens and I was not that afraid.
We were afraid maybe they wouldnt let us come to New York any more.
I was afraid of these Pollacks there on the other side.
But then you were afraid  because the Germans were walking by  and you were not allowed to move.
Interview with Halina Peabody June 3  2002 35 Well  we were all afraid.
Were you afraid when you were in this -- in the forced labor  were you afraid of what could happen?
He was not afraid of them  and he had many bouts with them -- the N azis and at the end he was also brought to 11 Dachau  but he survived.
So she said  she was afraid  so she said  \ Please come into my house.\
I was pulling trees and I got afraid a tree will fall on me because a lot of girls got killed with the trees.
I was afraid to leave the house  I stayed in the house most of the time  all the time  exce pt when my friend came to visit I might have gone to the village with her.
And I knew that my mother was afraid a nd that she was anxious and we had to hurry and we had to be quiet.
They they they th the fear was there  and they looked through their windows  there the road was like 300 meters from the house.
And so you  as you were talking about  the problem in the museum or any institution  if you start becoming cautious because youre afraid somebodys going to cut your money off  or youre going to lose your job or something is going to happen  then you lose the e ffectiveness.
Erwin Baum 85 December 5  1995 Page 85 watches to sell for him -- because he couldn't  you know  he was afraid.
Were people  at this point early on  were th ey apprehensive  were they scared that --?
Did you ever see a Jew comes with a sack and takes away a child?ﬂ She says  ﬁWhy  I dont know  but my mother always used to tell it to me  and I was USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0052 114 always so afraid I stopped crying.ﬂ The mother told it to her  she telled it to the child  and the child will probably tell it to her child.
He was afraid that the Russians knowingly would send us probably to Siberia because everybody in town knew that we were Zionists  especially my father.
And I guess we cried and got lice and people were very afraid because we endangered the lives of everybody.
Did you feel fear  did you feel any safety  did you feel yeah  i was it when she came back in the evening that somehow or other  okay  thin gs are best again  shes back  or can you recall anything like that?
But it never got to the point -- there was never so much that you were afraid that something would happen to you or your family  or -- Why?
The stores  nobody was there to take care of there  they were afraid of the bombs.
So if -- we all lived in expectation of another call  so the -- the sense of fear   the terror  the impending 58 risks or -- were there.
So th -- it was -- it -- but it was not just this that made it difficult  I mean there were -- there we re huge difficulties  because of course the one thing these people who all -- who had all decided to stay in Germany  not to go back to the Ukraine  and the one thing they were afraid of were the Soviet liaison officers. [
I think I can feel the fear that I experienced the night that we went home to uh back to our own apartment Kristallnach the feeling that my father would be taken.
Was that the I mean  was the biggest fear losing your family  or I dont you know  this is so very strange that I dont have I was just speaking to a friend of mine whos also who is my age.
So  however it was  I was afraid as a girl  of these Christian boys  but some of them were friendl y and others us-used to beat us up coming from school  so we used to go home in a group.
It was worse  but like this we had a good life  but we had no future and we was afraid for tomorrow.
And the whole camp had to turn to the face away from them  so not to get in touch with them or they were afraid we will make a revolution.
You can't -- anyhow  afte r he berated him and screamed  I mean  we were afraid they were going to shoot him.
So uh this friend of mine certainly was an elderly man and ha d grey hair  hair...you can abou t grayish...and we were afraid that uh the selection would have would would would uh be his end  so two or three friends...I was already a schriber   a secretar y...uh came to the conclusion some thing has to be done.
The fear from one another  from one Jew to the other and the German laughter and they came in clean beautiful clothes and touched us with a white glove only.
After the -- the -- you know  beautiful Switzerland and -- and the lake and this and that and we spend time in the most love -- the loveliest parts of Euro pe  to come to New York  which I was looking forward to  but I was afraid that it was going to be gray and ugly  sort of very European  but huge.
And believe it or not  my father was afraid of wild animals.
And I -- so even USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0053 6after I was liberated  I was afraid to tell my age.
But I didn't dare tell the little kids  my sisters  to do it  because I was afraid th ey would do it loudly.
A. The Jewish community tried to convince th e government to open up at least a little bit more and from time to time we succeeded but in most cases we have to admit that the 6 government was afraid of creating a problem in Denmark.
I really thank you fo r your consideration and for being so delicate with me  because I was always afraid of this - not afraid for  I was always - I felt that my body  I mean  Im not healthy enough to take - to think about Holocaust for so many  you know  hours at times because til now I was not successful in not suffering afterwards  but really it was so nice of you.
There was a system of dehumanizing everything we knew of from sitting in the back of the bus  wearing the star  a neighbor is not allowed to talk to you and wouldn't for fear of being put in the camps or being ostracized.
When they get through with them  they're not going to let us witness  sure the next thing will be they'll probably kill us.ﬂ So  we tried to figure out maybe a way th at we'll be able to run away.
And uh it was before uh in December  just before Christmas time that uh we were uh driven on a sleigh to some village to uh uh to be hidden in a farmhouse  except that uh the farmer who was hiding us  he had uh visitors and uh these visitors had heard one of the uh children was coughing or what  so that uh the farmer became afraid uh he would be betrayed  uh that he is hiding Jews  and we have to be smuggled back into the camp from which we had escaped.
Daily life was miserable; it was a life of daily fear.
We were afraid the Germans  but some Jews will live in small towns.
So they were afraid the Russians were going to come and we would be --they would grab us  you know  they grab the factory and everything.
I was afraid to go there  first  first of all  I couldn't afford it.
Even when I was very hungry  I was very afraid of something happen and that's the end.
And he came home in 1945  I remember late spring  it must have been April  May  probably  and he did not just stop by and said  ﬁHere I am.ﬂ He was afraid that maybe we would faint or something like that.
And then ma de a U-turn  sort of through the back [indecipherable] you fear somebodys going to come across the bridge  and we dont want to be here.
And indeed we -- we left  still not knowing  still full of fear  what will be in the train  gas in the train  the -- you know  this in the train.
I think at the end...not at the 20 end...at the point which I am now talking about...there were some thirty children and Demera  the lageraltester  the head of the of the camp  the Jewish head of the camp  was afraid that his child and his children who were badly...who were well treated  they had enough to eat...the Germans gave them enough to eat  but that they would would be gassed  so he persuaded...uh he told the SS look...we have the children.
He didn't know where to go and he was afraid to ask for directions  things like this.
If you have to fear for your own life  or for your life of your family  or life of yo ur community  you probably would do what they want you to do  if the system was like that Hitlerian system was Di when you said something before about you saw some of the concentration camp workers walking along the street Mm-hm.
And here we are afraid of the police  of the maligia (ph.).\  \
But you know  I was afraid to tell him ab out my background because here was a man that I really cared about and I was afraid again that if he'd found out I was Jewish he Eva Edmands 22 [Date not labeled] Page 22 would drop me like a hot potato  so I didn't say anything.
Were there are any other symptoms or manifestations of this fear that you can remember from your childhood.
I mean  I -- I never remember being afraid  I-I know that.
And there also was a incident  my fa my secretary  after she was freed  she had to fill out a questionnaire and she was afraid to reveal that she was not Polish.
I wasnt going to get myself sick  just immobilized by -- by the kind of fear I used to experience every single day of my life.
And they said it wa it wasnt me  was people  you know  who were German  and they were afraid of  or [indecipherable] nationality.
And as I was walking home  and I see– I got scared.
And we were afraid in case my father will go out in the street he will be recognized as a Jew.
I mean  nobody really got hurt serious ly  we would just get knocked around a little bit -- but I was afraid of it.
I cant say that I was ever afraid because I think because I was prepared  I was you know  as a child I think the air raid drills  thats something to really that has served me well throughout my life is I believe in preparation because I learned nearly in life that preparation and knowing what yo ur alternatives are  making several choices  having a plan A  B and C is good planning and gets you set  you know  for various eventualities.
And um  strangely enough  on  on that ride from Sosnovitz from the transit camp to concentration camp  um  there was a certain lightness which I remember   and uh  I can identify it now as um  the worst has happened  and as  as tragic as it was to be separated from my parents  in a way it was um almost you know  some of my fear left me there.
ﬂ And I told him  I said  ﬁWell ﬂ I told the group  ﬁa child cannot be afraid like an adult ﬂ which means to have a continuous fear.
Yes  because I was afraid I'm going to never see them again othe rwise  I wanted to know where they are brought.
Its interesting you say that  because Ive had interviews where people say  ﬁThey didnt fear the Germans so much as they feared  esp ecially in Poland  their neighbors.ﬂ Because the Germans seemed  according to these people who Ive talked to  seemed not to really know who was Jewish.
He said  ﬁDont worry  dont go ﬂ I was afraid that I will go to jail  that I dont go where I was sent.
I guess the overwhelming feeling was of fear for my father  fear for what's going to happen to us.
No  I feared for my life  but not -- not of being killed  rather  a-a-a-a-at the very end  I feared I was -- I was afraid I would die.
And I'm so afraid that I got involved...I will get involved with some man for what is punishment there  and I don't want that.
I dont kno w really  it was kind of natural probably  cause I -- I dont know even if I act -- I try not to be afraid  that was the main thing  I try not to be afraid.
I think because they were afraid we would row to Sweden  which could easily have been done.
You know  there there is saying  your teeth are alright  but your gums have to come out  and that was my case  and I was deathly afraid.
It wasn't so easy but we we left and uh so so they said we were afraid that they should throw the hand grenades so we ran away  and when we went to the to the gates  nobody was there.
I mean  I-I could use the stamps without being afraid to be identified.
I wasnt so invol you know  I wasnt politishin involved or no  you know  with the rights  or what in people need to kno w  or you know  to get to the polls  and people are very much afraid  you know  too.
18 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD So it was -- I don't remember being scared or upset.
And I was afraid  with the job was that the neighbors  so nervous and accepting  they used to come and tell me  ﬁ Dont get upset.
NOISE] Tape 23 HELEN LUKSENBURG page 63 What were you afraid of?
They only were not afraid when they had the gun above us.
Nobody treat anybody  you know  the -- everybody tried to survive and to -- even people that lived there for -- they settle in Pinsk  they live in Pinsk  everybody was afraid.
They were over every bridge  there were German soldiers walking back and forth because thats what they were afraid of  that the bridges would be mined.
And as I said to you before  wh en my father sent somebody to convince me to go back  and I said to you that I had boundless faith in the wisdom of my father  sitting here just now  I also believe that I was afraid  especially that I came from a family that was a wealthy family  that I would end up in Siberia.
We re you afraid  you know  what your mood was... when you were leaving the ghetto to go the next place?
He would...sort of afraid to give you a piece of bread.
We didnt see friends any more because everybody was afraid to -- to go out  the Jewish people.
But they didn't stop me beside  they didn't stop in any small places  they were afraid.
I did all of this very hurriedly so I am afraid I dont remember more than that.
They declined  thanks God  because we were dying in that closet of fear.
I am afraid the same s -- the same way  I would not cry  but I will not express it because my mom say to me do not open my mouth  and I didnt open my mouth.
He was not he was maybe a politician  but but he ra I think he wa won they blame him  and I think rightly so  because he actually not that he helped  but he was afraid  and he Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 7  1997 21sold actually  the Czechoslovak Republic in 1938 to Chamberlain and to Hitler.
I said  \ No  don't be afraid of me  I just Interview with William Luksenburg 7 wanted to dig up my clothes  my jacket  go ba ck to the station.\
When they from the minute they left until they came home  we were this I remember so vividly  we were so afraid for their lives.
We were just so happy to be amongst our own without fear of bei ng arrested.
Did he come and just ta lk to people  or did he Well  he wanted he wanted to make sure we were afraid of him.
Maybe they were afraid wed get shot at or something  I have no idea.
Yeah  but in order to go in the other side of the ghetto we have to cross the bridge and there also it was not convenient to do it because there were also a Jewish policemen  so we were not afraid of him  but also a Lithuanian armed guy.
It was clear it dragged on  the war dragged on but the the Germans had lost it  but the Germans who used children in the war effort and this was and I personally...m aybe it's my education...I was afraid that the last effort in a kind of in Waggoner's c ontext it's ...uh when everything is lost  they would at least see to it that the the rest of the Jews who were still alive  they would take 107 them with them.
And thats help us a lot  except that we were living with the fear that well never ge t out of it  because from the amount of food that they give us  we couldnt last forever.
