There was not the possibility to say quite a lot against him and probably - I can tell you that in Denmark  uh the highest of the three percent who voted for Nazi parti.. the Nazis.
That they criticize the Nazi policy  but in -- then also can support Nazi policy.
As soon as the Germans and the Nazi they saw it  they start to shot.
Unemployment was perhaps  I'm not sure of this now  but I would say perhaps 20% people weren't working  there  there was no jobs to be had  and as time went on  they became more and more sympathetic to the Nazi movement  first  I would imagine  for economic reasons and secondly  it became very popular to be antisemitic because it was easiest thing in the world  if you want to hate somebody  the Jews are always around!
He came in Shiltz  Heil Hitler and of course he was such a Nazi and I don't know how I possibly put my head so deep down that he doesn't see me.
Then I lived in this house of -- Before -- before we finish the Nazi occupation  I would like to ask you one more question about the ghetto.
The Nazis had become determined again that they were  since 1934 the Nazi party was outlawed in Germany in Austria  because they had tri-tried to have a putsch  and overthrow the government.
You know and they said they were forced and that they were not really a Nazi and so on.
Well  Hungary was an ally of Germany for political reasons and -- but it was a -- they were a reluctant ally.
When we came back  we searched for members of the fami ly or other friends and Jewish people that lived in that town before the Nazi came and we  there was no soul around.
Don't forget that the Russians took hundreds of thousands of Jews eastward as the Nazi armies moved eastward  okay.
I didnt know anything about the Nazi til the -- in 1941 the -- when they march to the city of Lvov.
You know  in these days you did...I I dare...let him dare to do so  but since he was himself  that judg e a member of the Nazi party  I was assured that that something could come out in the press.
Were there still Germans and then ba by that I mean soldiers  inside the camp  or not?
We were living -- we -- I never left my p -- when -- when -- when the Nazi come to Zabno  my aunt married to the doctor told my fa mily  listen  Im protected  Im not worry.
You see  going through the rigorous study...I mean  even becoming a Nazi soldier was not such a bad thing  you know.
When Auschwitz is referred to as the largest Nazi extermination camp  it is Birkenau that fits this description  for it is there where it took place.
Not to get the Nazi ideology out of them  but to keep the ones that were more serious Nazis out of -- out of important jobs.
That would have been the first act of murder committed directly by the Germans that I would attribute directly to the  the  the Nazi command.
So they went Nazi for awhile because they need ed jobs and maybe because of Hitler and all that  but on the whole they are a more leisurely people than the ever -- the Germans would ever hope to be.
A little bit further lived a family with three boys  and we were all -- so you had -- yeah  in Germany  the stuff was getting -- is Hitler  so one of the boys then turned out to be a Nazi  and the oldest was a Communist  and the in-between was in-between.
But they came all in with the Nazi emblem  which was like a lifesaver and there was written NASDP   National Socialist Democratic Workers Party  that's how they called themselves  with a swastika in the middle and one teacher came in with a Nazi uniform and whenever a teacher came in  the students get up and says Heil Hitler  when the teacher leaves the classroom  Heil Hitler  they all stand up.
That's great -- s ystematic persecution of Jewry by Nazi Germany and its collaborators between 1943 and 1945.
As soon as Hitler assumed power  there were frequent marches by the SA on  they had a fa scination with marches  as I said  this Mommsen Gymnasium  after that Nazi officer took over  one of the things he introduced  as I explained  was during the lunch hour  after eating lunch  we always marched around the street singing songs.
One is that it has a vidi -- visit of the famous historian  Freidich Meineker  who was known for his distance precision versus the Nazi regime.
Down on the street there were 5 actually SS Nazi officers and since our window of the factory looked out over the streets  t hey asked us to let them come in and see Hitler from where we were standing.
Nuremberg had the odious dis tinction of having Julius Streicher as the gauleiter  the Nazi leader of of Franconia  and also the Interview with Joseph Eaton May 27  2010 10publisher of ﬁDer Sturmer ﬂ and I was just wondering  you know  about how visible was ﬁDer Sturmer ﬂ Very visible.
But occasionally uneasiness and paranoia seizes me  especially when I see old strangers  my age  still envisaged them in a Nazi Brownshirt  or a black SS uniform.
So as we were standing there and the man got hysterical  suddenly somebody came from the village on a motorcycle  a Nazi  and gave instructions.
The ship you had to take was a Nazi ship  to ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 Kenya.
To get back  we felt that we had to show the size of I. G. Farben and demonstrate its worldwide influence for the purpose of indi cating what a necessary partner they were to the entire Nazi enterprise  and I would just like to quote a fe w  two short sentences from Telford Taylor  18 who was our chief counsel of the subsequent proceedings.
And then the Germ ans and the Norwegian -- the Nazi government  they wanted to use this.
I was -- I was officially discharged from the army  assigned to military government administration and I was -- and I had to travel to Frankfurt to report to a unit of the finance division of the office of military government  U. S. for short OMGUS  O-M-G-U-S  that was its official name  and all of the documents and so o n. And I was assigned to a -- to the -- to the unit within the finance division  who was supposed to do res-research on the German banking system during the Nazi period  for two purposes.
Then we were supposed to make our way to the railway station to go to Berlin on the train.
The pr -- The Nazi ideology is very poor  and after awhile its very difficult to do something  and by that  you know  it was a little bit  you know  they had very different topics  but in Farenow  the specific ideological issues were not debated very much.
I dont know whether that was a Jewish edict  or whether that was a Nazi edict  you know  to apply to everyone.
World War II began in September 1939 when Germany attacked Poland.
He was ﬂKarloffL. Th e name of the Nazi hunter who took my husband 6 was Inspector Karloff.
And we were not allowed to have any transactions  not business  not social  not sexual   because for the Nazi and the Jew  if this would happen  it would be punished.
Gave this sardines as I was carrying the bundle  Nazi picks me up.
I mean  the individual policem an could have been sympathetic and knew what a that the German Jews were not you know  in were not sympathetic to the German government  but there were also a lot of other Germans living in Holland who might have been  and there was a fifth column in Holland  wa a Nazi party run by Mussert.
World War II began  of course  with Germany's invasion of Poland on September 1  1939.
Our drivers on the car on the trucks by the way were Nazi prisoners  and I will never forget that  that nobody all the Norwegians  the Danes  they spoke German.
The Jewish establishment in Chicago  with the lawyers who volunteered to our help  suggested that we are to see i -- i -- Springfield  Illinois  the state capital  and we must inaugurate another law  that since freedom of speech must be given to them -- we tried to fight  that yes they can come  even to Skokie and speak  but they cannot wear these Nazi uniforms.
Erich Kulka had this photo and he used this at one time in Germany in a court to identify a Nazi.
Maybe ther e is some...Jew..some property still there  either gold bars or the things we also co nsider to be looted property  paintings  silverware  etcetera  not only in the  in the large Swiss banks  but maybe in some 17 International Refugee Organization: The major organization dedicated to the relief of refugees from the Nazi menace.
And I always ask that question  why do you say Nazi ?
And if I remember correctly  in July  certain part of July I think it was on the 15th or 20th or 25th there was an unsuccessful putsch against party  against the regime at the at the Nazi party the Hungarian Nazi party  which is the Arrow Cross party started to do a putsch.
She would say  I'm writing this letter with great danger to myself because of the Nazi censors.
So he says and from the Nazi point of view it was a major  very major crime.
I mean  its one thing to see the top leadership  (you know) the Nazi  and 10 or 20 of them being (you know) hanged.
Did you personally have any contact with anybody who had le ft had fled from Nazi occupied territory or from Germany itself?
It was a banner; it was political banner that was put up by the Nazi party.
And the one who was the Nazi took  takes on the identity of the one who died and tries to pass as the one who died.
And then I drove to the other end of the village because my mother had had a driver who was a radical anti -Nazi.
And start to work with double energy  went to t he commission for investigating  investigating the Nazi crimes and talk with them.
They was motorized  so Was that the first time you saw German soldiers?
And they were so -- there were uniforms  and -- and military drill  so to speak -- maybe it wasnt as bad as I -- I had the ex -- impression  but it reminded me too much of Nazi Germany  so I never went back  which was a big mistake  I might have made some [indecipherable] there.
My father  I know for a fact about six or seven months before the Anschluss  one of his employees came in and he said  Mr. Halpern  I am a member of the Austrian Nazi Parties  National Socialist Party  and eventually  you know  it's just a matter of time before we come here and we need friends.
Do you have any memories of your parents discussing the Nazi partys rise to power in Germany?
He was her -- the brothe r of her mother  of the Rice Youth Leader  with all the German Jews went into uniform  the Nazi party member.
She had a boyfriend and he was a Nazi and he was a spy and so after that things in the house had to become careful.
And they asked  are you a member of the Nazi party.
That evening  which was Christmas Eve  which is a holiday in Spain too...it's...there's a big supper on Christmas Eve and I had been inv ited to lunch at the Hotel by the Secretary of the Nazi Party  the Hungarian Nazi Party  and I feared that with this invitation he wanted to ask me to pay for the Spanish passports.
And they also called me Nazi because the language I spoke was German.
When I -- when we walked in  there was a nurse with us  from Romania and it was a beautiful  bright day and the Nazi officer there is standing with their boots polished and their pure  white gloves and their uniforms crisp and f -- ironed and we saw a woman being carried on a litter and you could see that she was dead  except that I had never seen a dead person and -- I was 13 years old.
I know they were taken... 15 The Nationaal Socialistische Beweging (National Socialist Movement)  organized by Anton Adriaan Mussert in 1931  functioned as the Dutch Nazi Party.
Now  to be a big shot in th e Nazi party  you had to be an a member of the Nazi party for a long time  during the time that it was illegal.
And a relative from my mothers side who was a religious nut but a Christian religious nut  but he was not a Nazi.
You and your mother would remain in Brussels  living in an occupied city  in an occupied country  under Nazi occupation  until 1942 when your mother made a profound decision to put you into hiding.
After that  you had to stay in your bunk  because there was no place to go and you were absolutely petrified to go outside  because if you showed yourself  the Ukrainian or the -- the -- the Nazi German could kill you or decide to -- he wanted you to -- to do some other job.
And we know that some of them really adopted the Nazi i-ideas.
I don't now I d on't think they were delivering spectacular justif ications of what happened in Nazi Germany.
And there was one Jewish -- one non-Jewish boy  who was the son of the physician in the town  who went up to the teacher and told her  and she actually did nothing about it  because she was part of the Nazi party.
There were because the plan of the Nazi government was Hungarian Nazi government was  up till then  from March 19–. Look  if I'm telling something you heard before  then stop me.
So the whole thing started a lot to be hopeless as far as as a Jewish individual that's in the axis of the Nazi Hungary.
So if you are a Nazi censor  you read this  you look at the stamp  it's a Swiss stamp.
And the secretary has taken  in the moment the SS men came to my husband  he has taken out the -- you know  h-he was a Nazi.
Then  the Hungarian Nazi party took over  and suddenly they reminded us that we should put on the star.
And I was  at that time  mostly dressed not ex actly  but similar to the Nazi uniform.
It may be  and I do not condemn Mr. Stuc ki as being a Nazi  I dont think he was  he was a ve ry stern  stiff Swiss diplomat.
Maybe it was the reaction to it  because it seemed to me that they were more 31 fascist  but -- than -- than -- than most Nazi s I had known  and I knew a hell of a lot of Nazis  you know?
Situation in Germany was rather unbearable  Black Market  one German would denounce another German for being a member of the Nazi party  for having done this or that.
Their fathers had positions in the Nazi party  and she has a Jewish girlfriend?
Also  there was a German supervisor  a Nazi with the swastika and everything else.
So we were aware of the fact and knew very well  and the the gene ral policy lines were very clear of the Nazi party and Hitler and but but we felt that maybe in a bit we are somehow immune from this.
Two years later  a little bit -- two and a half years later in November 1938  my mother gave birth to her second child  my sister Lea h. Another very  very special  memorable  sadly memorable  day in the history of the nausea era because this was -- of the Nazi era because this was right after Kristallnacht  the Night of Broken Glass  when hundreds of synagogues were burnt to the ground and thousands of Jewish businesses were plundered in Germany and really the start of the full fury of anti -Semitism.
And there were all the young people in their Nazi uniforms  including my grandfathers shop assistant Mitzi who was my -- who was my best friend  I thought.
No  no my teacher in elementary school was an old spinster  old lady and she was not a Nazi and she didnt treat my any way different.
It was like a punishment to be a Jew  you know?
Well  some of my friends coul dnt get over that  said  ﬁHow did you know he was a Nazi?ﬂ And I could just tell he -- and he was  he was -- Id swear he was a Nazi. [
>> Bill Benson: In 1941  then  that's when the Germans came in.
If  when Im finished with my book on book censorship in Nazi Germany  if I still have what it takes to write another one  I want to do something on the perpetrators  the Nazi perpetrators  why they did it  how  various explanations that have been put forth.
I still dont understand it in the scheme of the ge nocide  of the Nazi genocide  why that was done.
Even though there are Hungarian newspapers that say that I gave uh passports to Nazi ministers  that 's not true.
And a professor by the name of Noiman had written a book on Nazi Germany -- just a second -- Noiman had written a book called  ﬁBehemothﬂ and I studied that in some detail and then went in to see him.
Her husband was a German Nazi and had pictures of her with her of him in a Nazi uniform.
We hi red nobody without a security check which meant you had a very limited selection because we had a bout nine million Nazi party files in Berlin 79 to which I had free access.
My sister-in-law  Mrs. Sarah   was saved from Nazi captivation after she had been thrown into the extermination railway whence the American liberators extracted her.
But a Nazi would never allow those Jews to become Nazis.
And Nazi would beat his drum  and the other guy behind hi m would read a  read a sentence  why he had sinned against Third Reich.
The Nazis had sent their organizer to organize a Nazi Party in Switzerland.
There was a beauty competition to select a baby that would represent the perfect example of the Aryan race to further the Nazi philosophy.
So this Nazi man took Lydia to Milan  prob ably to the SS  she doesnt know where they took her.
And then you walked through the Yad Vashem Museum where all the photographs of original photographs of Nazis that t took the do cumentation  Nazi documentation took.
Uh really it was the called the Oberrealschule which was then perhaps on a somewhat higher level than high school  but uh uh those were  of course  already quite uh eventful times and I I grew up amid all this chaos of the different parties of of Weimar Republic fighting each other and uh from my earliest childhood on uh saw the formation of the Nazi Party and how they gradually gained strength and uh uh there were...early on there were perhaps times when one didn't uh take them all that seriously but it soon became apparent that they were a force to be reckoned with... Kurt  what is that...in your life  uh tell me tell me about how this affected you.
When I was in Croatia  Bulgaria  Rumania  and Poland I knew it was very serious then because of the German occupation because extremist Nazi government been...uh...placed because the Germans excentriated the fight against the Jews and so the situation was very critical.
That was a original position when I started that business of Nazi history.
And others wore the Nazi emblem  the Communist emblem  and more than once  I saw the street flights that really were something to behold as far as violence is concerned.
And -- and that was established there and it was there until at the end of it  the -- the -- the Nazi [indecipherable] the Rosenbergs team took over the yu -- the YIVO and -- and to some extent they -- they salvaged a good part of it  and the YIVO has it now in its archives.
While there  my mother describes a visit by a major Nazi official  Heinrich Himmler  and she describes how there was a lineup in the morning at 5:0 0 a.m.  and Himmler addressed all the inmates.
That I was in a  in a room an d some Nazi soldier came in and want to take people out and we try to hide  you know  that kind of dreams I had.
And we moved away from Augustow and we moved aw ay to Slonim  a town which was Poland after 1939  but then in the division of Poland and the Soviet Union the Nazi Germany and Soviet Union  ended up under the Russians.
But he was very you know  not every German was a Nazi at that point.
How much did you know about Hitler  and what was going on in Germany?
I think they were connected uh with the local Nazi groups in some way.
One of whom was a notorious Nazi and the and one died.
It was in newspapers  ﬁJews are no longer permitted on the street after dark.ﬂ There was a newspaper called Der Stuermer  which was the official organ of the Nazi party  with distorted pictures of Jews.
The following September 1939 World War II began with the German invasion of Poland.
And it...on the Bruderhof  I remember that the brotherhood which we called the Committed Members  they wrote letters to Hitler  to Goring  to the Gestapo  to the Nazi officials in Kassel  stating our situation very clearly.
So he went up to Davos and shot this Nazi gaulietier - killed him.
I wanted to go back for a minut e to the first declaration of war  when Poland was attacked by Nazi Germany and then is also attacked by the Soviet Union.
Now  the plan of the Hungarian Nazi government was  at the end  to em pty all those houses and put them in the actual ghetto  which there was a ghetto which was not done and not established  actually  by the Nazis.
But  I went into a train where the Germans were before.
And the Einsatztruppen made a direct order  so -- Have you ever talked with perpetrators  Nazi perpetrators?
And as -- you were still you ng at this time  but did you know anything about Hitler or the Nazi party or what was going on  you know  in Germany?
On the night of November 9 -10  1938  justifying their actions with the death of a German consular official  who had been assassinated a couple of days earlier  the Nazi leadership ordered out the rank and file of the party  the SS and the Storm Troopers  to make an open season against the Jewish population.
>> Bill Benson: Of course  Nazi Germany attacked Poland September 1  1939  starting World War II.
We used to go to Austria  Klagenfurt--that's when nobody ever had been a Nazi  nobody ever  they didn't even know what you were talking about if you asked them for the Nazi.
Well  of course the Nazi pa rty had started many  many years a go.
And everybody ha-had this the armband on with the Nazi insignia  and flags all over the city  and I couldnt understand how suddenly people that I I felt if you give them the chance to vote would have voted against the Nazis  now ev erybody seemed to be for it.
And in Geneva  in Switzerland  it -- Fascist Italy  Austria  the Nazi Germany  all Nazi  now France  Nazi.
Laughter] There was no treatment available and my mother's major concern was I would be taken into the Nazi dispensary  which that had in the camp.
The Swierczyskis had a house whose huge garden abutted the garden of the Nazi governor of Lwow .
They just went through the whole country - within one week  there was no Polish government anymore  and immediately th e Nazi occupation took over.
We didnt know about it at the time but it claimed the interest of the highest echelon of Nazi power.
You couldnt be -- God forbid  obnoxious in the street or something  you know  because people -- there was always a Nazi waiting in -- in someplace waiting for you  you know?
By the 1980s  because the big fry were either already tried  or die - had died  there was a broader and more intensive public and legal concentration on different types of connections with Nazi crimes  and the connection with forced labor was clearly one of those.
So then the Germans find you  and how did you get to Germany ?
Q. Do you remember being aware of Nazi for ces occupying Belgium?
And my mother said yes  but I think its better if you Interview with Kurt Roberg March 16  2001 18dont wear that  because you can be something and you dont have to advertise it  because if somebody who sees and doesnt like it  you may get into an argument or a fight and you know the Nazis of course well  the Nazi kids  they would stick together and the SPD kids would stick together.
But the principal was a 2 Nazi  because he insisted that I was sitting  that I would sit in the back.
And its one week later that Nazi Germany attacks the Soviet Union  and breaks the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact by attacking.
On September 1  1939  Germany begins World War II by invading neighboring Poland to its east.
So I guess what I'm going after is a sense of the politics in the air and whether there was more Nazi symbolism  whether there were more kids on the street.
For several years  I did have Gentile girlfriends and  of course  under the pressure of the Nazi time they could no longer associate with me  and I would not dare associate with them.
But you know  there were just million stories there and we had some very inspirational speakers  we had Elie Wiesel and Serge Klaufeld  the famous French Nazi hunter there.
And that was the only documentary film  and the only photographic evidence we had of the Nazi leaders  like Hess  and Goering  and Stryke r  and Lie  and seeing them perform in this  ﬁTriumph des Willens ﬂ in this film  was the only way that our -- our trainees could learn anything about what these Nazis even looked like.
You have now gotten escorted the next day  by a Nazi  back to Brussels.
The reason we were looking...it's a very interesting thing is  I was looking for this particular Nazi all over.
I went to th e– Hitler  you know  in 1936  I believe  started  was when Jewish children could no longer go to school with others.
But children were just as big a temptation for a Nazi with a dog as a grown-up was  just for the sake of  you know  scaring a Jew kid.
And some of them 27 - and some of them emigrated to -- to Nazi Germany  and took their teenage children with them  who spoke fluent -- they were am -- American kids  they -- Right  right. --
So he had gotten some Nazi uniforms  got a Nazi truck -- well  command car.
You knew they were members  some of them became members of the Nazi Party.
Now I was instead of an enemy of Nazi oppression  I became an enemy alien.
I did not want the Nazi period to dominate my life  like some other Jewish survivors.
Anyhow  so I was -- I was really into the Christian theology [indecipherable] and then in the Baroque  which goes directly to my interest  you know  in Nazi liturgy and things  which is -- comes after  in a sense  from the Baroque  yes.
There was -- practically everybody was in the Nazi party because of the mandatory membership -- Right -- -- from '37 on.
Apparently it was Nazi people in Spain  where a great many had been able to reach and survive  and they bought it.
Was there discussion -- once Hitler took power in Germany -- Yi -- -- was there discussion around the table about what was going on in Germany?
They went back there and still the surroundings were constant reminders of the Nazi occupation and the things that had happened to them.
When we were in immigration in Italy  and the woman who offered us a villa  and took us in  you know [indecipherable] to be their tenant  and Im not talking little ho le  I mean talking Italian villa  and they give us a room  and a kitchen  and its a long story  and we -- on the end they gi -- bor -- when they have to go in the hiding when the Nazi come in  th ey tell you  she give us cash  so we can go in the hiding.
She was given a beautiful villa from a big Nazi that had a lot of crystals and beautiful furniture.
Then  when the Nazi law were adopted by Mussolini  in Italy  there was a great deal of criticism about Mussolini doing that.
And while were hiding in the ghetto  my mother  my father  my baby sister and I  he escapes from concentration camp and manages to get across a railroad track just as a Nazi munitions train was going.
And when we met a week ago or two  she didn't believe that I don't get money from the Nazi war because we went through so much  we said  \ Ours was our daughters\ .
It was made ever more difficult  because the teacher we had was even then a Nazi.
If you're working at a municipal or a federal office that register s people to leave the country  and now you have have a German occupation  a Nazi occupation  and it's war time and pe ople are no longer allowed to leave the country  what happens to that office?
Every time we moved we had everything or my mother or anybo dy that Nazi out there with the bayonet pointed at you and hes ready.
So you were officially a refugee from Nazi oppression but then when they got panicky  they decided you were an enemy alien and you had to be interned.
and shortly the war broke out between Nazi Germa ny and the Soviet Union  and it is there that I really met up with the Nazis.
I must admit that in Copenhagen  there was a -- a group of police -- of people who was really Nazi infiltrated. [
In Berlin itself were th ere signs of the Nazi regime?
Theres just the next polarization between younger historians who want -- who would go back to some ideological explanation  said as Uri Shalbud  and the other ones who were some experience and say  well  you will have the same development as we had at -- that he originally stud-studied all the time  the Nazi [indecipherable] longer  and we got a idea that its not so important.
And he was talki ng about Hitler and all the rest of the things and they used Mauthausen...they had sent a lot of radio and press people  magazine people to Mauthausen to write about it and question everybody and they used Mauthausen as a horrible example of Nazi atrocities.
So we knew the Nazis had  but what had happened was that the Nazi  German troops Hitler had already arranged for the German troops to cross the river   I mean Austria didnt have a (inaudible) .
I guess my father thought maybe the Nazi government was going to blow over.
So they would organize  and some of the people who joined the partisan had been professional military people  particularly the Alpini in Ba ldosta  the Alpini  who were very good at climbing  who were very good at exercise  and -- and the German and the Nazi Fascist were determined to -- to get rid of them.
If anybody hated a Jew  perhaps he hated somebody else   too  because he was a hater.
The people in the tunnel would attack Nazi munitions trucks  shoot the tires and kill the drivers who would not run away  and steal grenades  guns  ammunition  clothing  anything they could get their hands on.
It's interesting because my first exposure with the Nazi military was before World War II and I was in Switzerland with my parents in a town that's right at the border  the German border  called Reinfelden.
You know  Id -- I leave out the horror stories  I -- I just in general -- general suffering  I mean  cause my worst experience was when I stood next to the Nazi  and he threw this child against the wall.
One was  that it turned out that back in 45  after this document was confiscated at the Nazi public partys publishing house in Munich by the Americans  they had made a microfilm of it back in 45  and provided it to the British.
I can say this  um  the fourteenth reconnaissance platoon was out scouting and they ran into a bunch of Nazi SS and they were captured.
More and more people were voting for Hitler  or voting for the right wing parties  some of whic h were eventually merged into the Nazi party.
My handwriting is very  very bad and sl-slow because of my Parkinsons Disease.ﬂ He was very impress and he always admi red that I was lucky to be part of the force that helped wipe out the German army and the German Nazi regime.
The area b-by the slava -- where my pa -- p -- fathers family was from  became  after the Nazis occupied Czechoslovak  the Czech part  Bohemia and Mulravia  that Slovakian pa rt became inde -- sort of independent  but it wa -- he was a Nazi  he collaborated with th-the Nazis.
And Jim Donovan hired me within a half hour and for the next month or so  I busily engaged in studying in detail  the OSS reports on Nazi Germany  and they were terrific and very well done.
And then we went on the -- on the train to Berlin.
Do you remember anything about Nazi propa ganda on the radios for example.
Not everybody was a Nazi  you know  or a Jew hater.
There was a regulation -- a -- a State Department regulation already in 1945  barring Nazi collaborators from coming into the United States.
And he said to me  I dont know whether we will be successful in negotiation with Nazi authorities  he says  but if you like  he says  Ill put your name on the list.
But today  most of the researchers in a way of taking up our Functionalist -- Functionalist elements of explanation  and everybody gets aware that Hitler was not a man who was -- had -- had that [indecipherable] personality  you know  that this was a merth  and that things are even more -- were even worse  because there are many people who -- who pushed the process  I think  atafond  and certainly this viewpoint increases a responsibility  and a moral responsibility of the nation  versus a specific Nazi perpetrators  you know.
Did you hear about the Nazi Olympics in 36  and the issue of should Jewish boys go -- go over and participate  or not?
Who arranged for this Nazi to leave  or you just marched in?
If you did take your cap off in front of a Nazi you got beat.
And interesting  I says  the Nazi  they didnt like to hear the word Nazi.
And those were the days when there was a janitor that lived in Hyde Park  I believe  Im not quite sure where  and they found out that he was a Nazi in one of the concentration camps and they wanted to pr osecute him and all his neighbors stood up and said  ﬁWell  how can you do this?
But they left behind the (unclear word) the Gestapo  the Nazi party  the special unit that were called...I don't even know exactly.
What was it like for you when you came across somebody from the Hitler youth  or a Nazi  lets say.
Actually  we were in an -- in an area of Germany which was very  very Nazi.
>> Jacques Fein: It was by a very famous Nazi hunter.
After you became a citizen  what was it like for you -- and this would have been more recently  when there were very open Nazi rallies in this country?
106*0143 22 her to her apartment and there we were very safe because she also I think she had a special I.D. or something  that she was a high ranking Nazi member  a personal friend of Hitler.
But they got to know each other  and in who in 1934 or 35  joined the Nazi party and joined the Brownshirts.
And of course eternally they said oh I never was a Nazi or I was this  I tended to cut them up s  cut them off short.
If he wouldn't join the Nazi party  he would go also to concentration camp.ﬂ And  and I saw these things happen because there were certain times where  where SS soldiers were brought to concentration camp for not fulfilling the orders that they received.
And by rectifying borders my town remained under the Nazi occupation and th e rest  21 kilometers away from my town Augustow was already the Soviet Union.
And there we were put into a camp  which looked like a Nazi camp.
However  I was told that after the Rustellimenti  there was this page  then -- there is one page that you can copy  there was a frantic telephone call -- not telephono  some me -- some message  radio  whatev er  I dont know exactly  to the Committee of National Liberation saying why the Germans -- th e Nazi are negotiating in oursta with the church  and the representative of the partisan bands  or the truvalai  bartonunch  valdayass  dressonai.
Do you have any recollection of the time your father came home having somewhat been beaten up by a Nazi?
But there were others that I felt they were going through strong guilt experiences in in their own Well  there theres a certain Im pro Im not pr-projecting  but Im assuming that lets say  if youre a German and you have a parent that you loved  and that parent was a Nazi Right.
And yet interestingly as wed drive I remember driving along in the trucks  th ere would be children watching us and they would be giving the Nazi salute.
And then  what I did with Raoul  every day I had to go up there  and I went on the streetcar because they were over in Buda  and for a while I was hostessing  you know  I was with thousands and thousands of Jewish people  and  and eh  until Nazi  um  people came up to us for these paper...because when Raoul arrived and he asked what  what the embassy has done  they said  \ We have given out 80 passports.\
Do you remember any conversations about the Polish government  about Hitler coming to power in Germany ?
But everybody in the camp knew when a Nazi says we're going to resettle or evacuate your folks  that means we want to kill them.
And a group of Nazi sold iers went through that building  and they were regular soldiers.
The only thing was annoying me  at the time the custom control and so on  entry  legal entry in the United States  I had to sign that I was never a Felix Horn 41 [Date not labeled] Page 41 Nazi.
And he told me that the House of Commons in England  the debate of the situation of Jews in Germany and Austria  had been  uh  there was a debate in the House of Commons  and as a result there of  they have decided uh to give shelter to approximately 10 000 unaccompanied children from th e age of 13 to 17 for the time being so the children could relax and could  could recover  and were not exposed to the persecution in  in  in  in Nazi Germany and Austria.
>> Bill Benson: September 1  1939  Germany invades Poland and World War II begins.
The growth of the Austrian Nazi party was palpable  although again as a child I did not   that did not register with me particularly.
Every middle-aged man or older man I saw  I saw him in a Nazi uniform.
And he was just sounding so much like a Nazi  all I had to do was close my eyes and -- and -- and see the SS insignia.
So the whole idea of -- of extrem e decentralization of banking  very important [indecipherable] anyways  but in this case it was important not to allow th e reconstitution of -- of the instruments which were important instruments in the whole Nazi program of -- of -- of -- of control and -- and -- and centralization of economic power.
And I was thankful not to be there any more  in spite of the food and everything  because th-this was the first time and th e only time I was in really Nazi environment.
After the war he was called for the Nuremberg Trial  and my father then [indeciphe rable] this man wasnt a Nazi  he saved a thousand people.
So he  to me -- Viel was the -- remains the ultimate example of the evil that the Nazi system can inculcate in human minds  making them believe at the individual level that not only Adolf  but they as their emissaries had the ri ght to kill on sight  without being accountable to anybody.
In spite of the fact that there was a lot of talk about the threat against us in Poland and in spite of all the horrid things that we heard happening with Nazi expansion  in spite of the fact that there were air raid drills  in spite of the fact that the city was strung with flags and posters flapping in the air  screaming \  United  Prepared  and R eady!\
My friends  Tetsa lived for a while in a house in Okmar wh ere a neighbor said to her people  \ We know you have a Jew here in the house \  and they denied it  but they knew she had either been seen  and that these people were Nazi sympathizers  so then they placed here elsewhere--she came maybe back to us for a while or my grandmother's or an aunt of mine who hid people t oo in Hausen.
>> Bill Benson: Nazi Germany turned on the Soviet Union June 1941  just months after your birth.
Im glad I was privileged to have the opportunity to fight against Nazi Germa ny.
Was there any discussion at Harvard about what was going on in Nazi Germany that you can remember?
Th ey told us...the Nazi tell us to...told us to pick up the clothing and take it to the storeroom.
Not only that but the Hungarian government wanted to send a diplomatic representative to Madrid in order to  to tie diplomatic rela tions with the Anglo-Americans to see in  in  in view of the peace treaty  and logically the Spanish government who didn't wish to recognize the Nazi government  didn't wa nt to hear anything about it.
And I cant tell you the feeling that we had  after having been under USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0055 15 German occupation  all you saw were Nazi so ldiers  swastikas flying all over the place  and all of a sudden  for the first time in five years  we see an allied soldier in uniform.
A Jew with the name of Frankfurt had had shot and killed the representative of the Nazi organization in Switzerland by the name of   but at this time the Nazi s obviously didn't feel strong enough that they could do anything.
And so it was  I would assume it was considered a public school  but it was a Jewish  ran by the Jewish community.
The first year there was very little Nazi activity in the school.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 6 Because they knew when the Germans would come and perhaps arrest you  they would ask  Where is the rest of your family?
She owned a shoe store and a most beautiful apartment and a very known husband of a   and she was a Nazi.
Did you ever witness  for instance  a Nazi ha-have an interaction with a Jewish person that was disturbing to you?
Well  school kids  friends of mine  when we walked home from school  or when we walked to school  very often there were mobs of Hitler youth and they just beat us up  and nobody came to our rescue.
Streicher 5  the worst...one of the worst of the Nazi had a magnificent mansion outside of Nuremberg.
As the Nazi regime went on  what else happened to you and your family?
It was a Communist family  very staunchly anti -fascist  anti -Nazi.
He is well -known as a stamp  postcard and letter collector  especially for his Holocaust postal history collection including those from Nazi -created ghettos in Poland.
>> Bill Benson: In 1941  then  that's when the Germans came in.
And he comes with the idea of a refugee -- War Refugee Board composed of represen tatives of the State De partment  the reasury  and the War Department  which should be entruste d with the special task to deal with the problems of the victims of Nazi persecution and the help which can be given to them.
I and my mother were taken of f the street in the Kovno ghetto by a Jewish policeman  following the directive from the elder council and the Nazi rulers .. to provide them like 500 workers for the re for the Riga ghetto (Riga  the capital of Latvia  not that far from Kovno).
A few years later I came back with one of my employees  Dr. Katzerstein  who became a key man in one of the organizations se t up to help Nazi victims.
He also  in his speeches  published by the Nazi regime  in during the war  would repeatedly refer to his promise to kill all Jews in Europe   on 30 January 39   always said he did it on for September 39.
So we understood that he had not come out of his Nazi training and his Nazi idea of what he was doing.
And in that zone  you was always in danger if they catch you  the Nazi -- the Italiament -- the Italian Fasc ists would turn you over back -- they would not harm you  they would give you back to the Croatian Nazis.
But Slovakia  the region where I was born  didn't  never seen a Nazi.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 4 >> Bill Benson: When they married in 1938  Nazi power had really come into its full b loom  if you will  since 1933.
And then you had the Voelkischer Beobachter  and the -- and the -- the Der Stuemer  and all the Nazi newspapers  telling you exactly what the news is  their government news outlets.
One day in the Nazi time -- we were very good friends -- she came up to me  and she said  ﬁI am terribly sorry  Im not allowed to play with you any longer  my father would lose his job.ﬂ I was terribly hurt -- well  I mean  there were more things to be hurt about  but this I remember very clearly.
I don't -- but  you know  here is a guy  here is -- that the Nazi s put in there because they -- they saw in him something that they thought would be to their advantage  and it turned out it wasn't.
So he took a Nazi command car  a Nazi uniform -- >> Bill Benson: That they had stolen.
but in two hours  the government completely collapsed  Horthy was arrested  his family deported actually  and the Arrow Cross  the most extreme Nazi Hungarians took over.
There we re families in the area  thank God  where we lived that were very anti -Nazi that eventually helped them a lot.
No  I said befo re I would never understand the Nazi movement.
War began  of course  when Germany invaded Poland  September ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 5 1939  then Nazi Germany would invade France the following May of 1940.
He was among the first one killed because he was on the train and made some anti -Nazi remark.
No  that was later in the earliest before th e Nazi movement came  everything Hitler.
Uh but I was not specifically aware until my freshman year at Syracuse when as a political science major I began to learn of the uh anti Semitism that uh some of the Fascist countries were subjecting Jews to  particularly in Nazi Germany.
I recall when the Nazis came to power in Germany  there was quite a strong Nazi party in Danzig.
In fact the Kristallnacht even  which was a case of random violence  was criticized within the Nazi circles very much and in fact actu ally  at a ministerial meeting  a cabinet meeting two days afterwards  Goring severely criticized  I think Goebbels was mainly behind that  because of a ll the destruction.
>> Bill Benson: Rae  of course   Nazi Germany attacked Poland September 1  1939  starting the Second World War.
And the passengers who had been assigned to those two countries fell into the Nazi hands  which -- which marked them -- which guaranteed -- sealed their -- their fate  marked them for extermination.
Before we turn to the actual war years  let s start with you telling us about your family and yourself in those early ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 5 years  what it was like living under Nazi power as the power before the war.
Were you afraid that the Nazi movement into the Soviet Union would come south  or you didnt think about it?
And the answer is always the Nazi s thought of these people as second -class citizens.
There was three Nazi guys and they took the Jewish people out.
And you can– you know  in front of so many SS or Nazi in the camp  you dont have a... if they decide to kill you  they will kill you anytime they want.
Baldur von Schirach had formed a Nazi group or the youth group about 1925 or so when he was himself in...in college.
The question were -- we -- we had to go to CIA and they ask USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0027 57 you  ﬁWere you a prostitute  were you a Communist  were you a -- a Nazi  were you a Fascist?ﬂ N-Nobody  of course would sa -- tell that he was  but -- and then we had to go through a medical examination  if youre hea lthy.
Some I did leave to Pol es for safekeeping  some I took with me to Sobibor and a Nazi  threw me in a well and everything went wet and ruined my whole  whatever written down.
And uh so everybady knew we were Jewi sh and after my fa ther came back END OF TAPE ...continental waters of the Indian Ocean  you kn ow  what do you call it  uh Albanian waters and then hopefully get their motors to work and get uh I don't know how many of these I only know that once again surpri singly enough this woman with her strong Nazi background and her husband would patrol the beach.
And we would  which is ve ry simple thing because for instance  a lot of them lived -- th-the Nazi -- I always refer to th em as the bunsin  the big -- the big boys -- a lot of the Nazi leaders  they had a tendency to cluster.
Maybe the membership of the Nazi party or something  and so he - he insisted we must get marri ed.
That man didn't think anything  was one of our detectives from the hotel  that he was alr eady a Nazi.
But that had all been confiscated by the time -- 37 That was all the [indecipherable] by the Nazi.
She was saying that this is a unstoppable wave  that anything what is somehow German  will become Nazi German.
I mean  you know  that was  for instance  one of the great contrasts between Americ a and Europe  because in America -- in Europe people knew about the Nazi regime   and it was not only a Jewish affair  thousands of non-Jews  10 thousands  hundr ed thousands [indecipherable].
That Uncle Steffie  remember I told you about  the Nazi th -- he was still alive  with his wife.
The -- the Nazi influence stop in fil -- Finland and up there  way up north.
Now they were out in the open too  but my father wasn't working and so their story was a more difficult one than ours  and so they had continual contact with [Pinkstrum ]  the one who gave us the false papers  and he again 12 throughout the war continued to help us make up stories supporting my parents' stories and so on so that if we had had one NSB--which was the Nazi...which was the Nazi support group in Holland.
And I was charged with  uh  uh  demoralizing  you know  the spirit of the recruits--by making statements that I will never give an oath to Hitler  I will never fight for him  I will never wear the Nazi insignias and that I rather be willing to die than to serve Hitler.
And to me  I said it one time  I says: I won't go in that Nazi car.
And we -- we talked to people who confessed  I was a Nazi  yes.
Did your parents try to explain any of the Nazi related events to you when they began?
I want to move now to your role in a very important historical moment that you had and that's in the capture of...in the apprehensi on and the capture of two major figures in Nazi...the Nazi rule of Germany and in the destruction of the Jews  and I understand the first one you captured was Robert Ley.
And he didnt really fit into th e Nazi element because he was above them all.
How much in the early 30s did you know about what was going on in Europe and Germany in particular?
>> [Laughter] >> Bill Benson: Because you were only allowed to take a Nazi ship.
And in the restaura nt  policeman was he got shut this door and he brought Nyil as  you know  the Nazi Nyilas?
So  finally everybody who wanted to come  did come  unless they could prove that theyre Nazi.
I'd lived in New York when I was clerk for Gus Hand  and back in those days  there was a guy named Fritz Coon(p h) who was around  who was a well-known American Nazi.
But that -- that was the general -- you are heartbroken when you are in a concentration -- Nazi concentration camp.
Interview with Norbert Hilsberg August 12  2002 11 What was your reaction when you he ard about the Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses?
And this Hungarian Nazi party decided that the best way to kill people was to take them down on the side of the Danube in a dark night and rope 3 together and shoot them into the Danube.
I was much more concerned about the Germans  the Nazi Germans coming in and hanging hundreds of Serbs accused of 59 being communists  all over the main market square s in Montbachkirche  in Boch  in -- there are three major cities in the Banar.
It was doing the work of enemy  so uh I decided to stay in German and this came somewhat later and I also thought that if I could uh analyze literature and if I could uh write about German literature  I could certainly do that work for those who had been exiled from from Germany during the Nazi period  and I became in somewhat of a scholar of uh exile literature and of those who and the writings of writers who uh perished in the concentration camps  and I've written on that uh and uh last last year a book called 18 \ Literature...\   or in German  Literatur in Exil   which was published in Germany and I think looking back  I've made the right decision  because uh I've lent  lent voice to some writers who possibly without me might be forgotten or not remembered very often  so I have uh in a way uh kept their memory and the memory of their writings alive.
At that time  and I must confess  at that time I didn't know a communist from a Nazi  or anybody else.
What about  when you say that the Nazi authorities left and the political prisoners took over  could you say that they liberated -- the German political prisoners liberated the camp  or was it another army that did it?
And after so much no ise a few minutes before  all of a sudden the noise and the cries of the little babies are being all being quiet by the shots of a Nazi gun.
They were -- later on th ey knew it was not a big honor  to be from the Hitler youth  or from the Nazi movement.
How much did you know about the Nazi attempt to seize power in Austria in 34?
And I said  \ I am going to tell the Nazi party about it and  you see  they'll be very angry at you.\  (
Were you aware  before the Germans came in  of what was go ing on in Germany and  did you know about Hitler  did you know about any of this?
None -- Well  except for the fact that Hitler came to power in 1933  in -- I believe it was January  and of course we had -- the Na zi movement was very active in Germany  and as far as that is concerned  we -- we were -- I wa -- I wouldnt say suffering  it was 1933  we were very much aware of what the Nazi movement was all about.
So he  even though there was a Nazi boycott  he continued to try and sell  although gradually the business stopped  because it was dangerous and counterproductive for Germans to do business with any Jew.
Number two...during the period durin g which it was active  that means generally '44 to  ' | i May '45...this early the end of the war  uh tw enty million dollars have been uced  Jewish money...I come to this later...twenty million dol lars have been used in order to alleviate the fate of the persecuted  the Nazi persecuted victims  Jews and lots of nonJews  uh but the great majority  of course  Jews  and the the money was Jewish money.
And it's the Lithuanian fascists  who were prepared for all the time since the Russian rule was in Kovno  secretly  by the Nazi agents to have uniforms and ammunition.
This woman  with all her Nazi background  never never gave us away.
I open the book and its called Gedanta volume one and two  the collection of the Jews of West Germany killed by the Nazis as reported and recorded by the Nazi -- I mean  post-war by -- and in this book I looked under Lakritz and I dont find my father.
And then the Nazi government  Norwegian  they had to give in  because the Germans would be furious if their laborers  all those  didnt get any food at all  it will stop all work.
The second year  I had a guy by the name of Meininger   who turned out to Interview with Ralph Hockley January 12  2016 26 be the head of the Nazi party in the area.
There was one teacher  he was a big Nazi  one teacher.
He was an Austrian  and he was trying to tell me he was not a Nazi  he was had a big family  please dont kill him.
And that it took him f -- It took him so -- quite a time to explain himself  whatever  which  that process  they call it denazification in Germany  where they apparently tried to find those that were higher up in the Nazi hierarchy and whatever they were accused of.
Because he was right next to this important Nazi officer and they never ever considered the little house in between there.
I was suspicious of practically everybody : Were you a Nazi during the Holocaust?
So it was the fi rst encounter where the influence of the Nazi regime had an effect even before Romania -- while Romania was still under the government  the democratic government that had nothing to do with Hitler  but the Germans beca -- stopped talking to me and ignoring me [indecipherable].
But I tell you  I saw a boy on a bicycle  he met a Nazi and he lifted his hand and he fell from his bike  so they said on the bike  you don't have to lift your hand  just make  sit up straight.
As a result  Mr. McCloy has not been in the good graces of either the Nazi victims or the Jewish organizations.
Then  Seisencort  who was a traitor of Germany  the head of the uh  Austri an Nazi  who had uh  was the head of the Nazi government from 38 became the head of our govern ment so we had a civilian Gestapo government really  rather than  uh  Denmark had a military government  uh Belgium had a military government  France did  and the military  although they cooperated with Hitler  they weren't as antisemitic and as rabid.
World War II began in September 1939 when Germany attacked Poland.
So didnt the Nazi propaganda contradict what peoples daily experiences were?
The prospect of Jewish Nazi victims going to German lawyers and paying them in an effort to get compensation  the nature of which was highly uncertain  and the value of which was highly uncertain was not something that they would do.
I would have been one  I would have been Jewish  but -- the Hitler Youth.
On the contrary  he died believing that he was right  and when he was buried I have a picture of his burial in the town of Celle  in Germany  there was a crowd of Germans giving him the farewell salute  the Nazi salute. [
That just about 63 encompasses everybody who was anybody in the Nazi regime.
They did have an underground of people who were anti -Nazi who tried to help.
So  and Barouka Kuno  a fair minded soldier  he was not a Nazi  he was from the tri -- he was a Sudetendeutsche.
We were isolated from any news and from any friends or people of Jewish contact  and thats why my br other traveled into Munich  to see what is going on there and o -- upon his return  we waited a week or so and then we decided that it would be better for us to be where the Jewish population is  despite the fact that we could have had a very substantial German f actory and property from the Nazi that was -- evacuated the house  which we occupied after his leaving.
He did not really act very courageous ly under the Nazi era.
That was in 19  when we went to that movie where the Nazi sat next to us and made that lousy remark and   as I said before  he looked like a gentile and I looked like a gentile  nobody cared  thought we were Jews.
I says  you damn Nazi  you put me with the doxies in camp.
>> Bill Benson: To the Nazi the company and his crew.
We had two  we had two free parliamentary elections Denmark during the German occupation and the last one  the Nazi party  was simply trashed and the Germans didn't  didn't interfere.
And as I said  their mission was their main mission was to try to fight off the Nazi s. Well  you dont fight off people with machine guns when they come in  and of course  they couldnt.
Well  you know  besides all -- as you know  far more important than any Nazi indoctrination was the terrible loss of -- of moral radius  something like a -- a -- people got accustomed to moral indifference.
And so I told him  Mr. Krauser  I did...did want to know my family's 2 Alfred Rosenberg was a leading ideologue of Nazi racist theories and served as the Reich Minister for the Occupied Territories in the East.
If the Nazi censors open it I will be sent to concentration camp.
That 30 or 40 miles down the road  not in the country  wa s a very famous German...uh...obstetrician  pediatrician  who was barred from practicing medicine because he had not only been a Nazi  but he had done experiments on Jewish ch ildren.
You see the Judenrat was formed  and then Judenrat was basically the admi nistration of the ghetto and the people  and they were responsible for all the demands made by the Nazi authorities or whatever.
And besides this I made a compromise when I went with the Zionist youth cl ub and  and when I went to Frankf urt  I studied at the in Frankfurt and then afterwards I went to Wurzburg an d I tried to bring people closer and make them accept it and so forth all the time  so I think I had this kind of th ing  even I talked to the Nazi teachers in school  I always tried to compromise in a certain way  but not give up my principles  because when the teachers told me that you cannot go to school any more  I mentioned this already before and I just said to him  \ We are on the same wavelength  you be a Nazi and I be a Jew.\
So  I picked up work  kept on working the right way and they come around  the inspectors  the Nazi inspector  they came around and they checked me out  how I worked.
So even though the Nazi laws started earlier in the rest of Germany  the border area was relatively still minority -friendly and then lost those protections very suddenly in 1936.
>> Rae Goldfarb: Nazis -- the Nazi were the hierarchy   so the German soldiers.
It was done in the name of all the Jewish organizations on behalf of the Nazi survivors.
When the Germans came  the contents of the museum was confiscated by Alfred Rosenberg  who despite the name was a Nazi  not Jew.
It was a Jewish school  and a Jewish elementary school  which was not uncommon in Germany   they were that that there even before the Nazi times this [indecipherable] there were schools that were  you know  t even today they have parochial school supported by the state  and so that the Jew the Jewish schools were also partly supported by the state.
You had suddenly -- your best friend was suddenly a Nazi.
One of them heres the amazing thing  one of them was a midwife to my birth  and she was a high ranking member of the Nazi party.
And the -- some of the Nazi -- none of the Nazi teachers I had in the Catholic school were evil  because the religi on balanced that.
So Hein and Ab went there  and they said -- they first sends them out if th ey were good  and they were good  you know  that they were por the Netherlands  and not Nazi.
In uniform  looking very much the Nazi -- well  the -- the German officer that he was.
Was her first holiday and she had six weeks with her husband and because the women got a lot of money in the Nazi time.
He had the Nazi flag on it  and he had a Nazi uniform  and he was very rough with me.
He was a member of the party  he was -- He was? --
The Nazi Commander  his spirit broken  told the Americans  'You Americans don't fully appreciate the real power that's in you.
Here I was jumping into Fe stung (fortress) Europe  which was a Nazi dominated France  German soldiers  and I had an H on my dog tag.
If you spoke German  they looked at you like you were a Nazi.
And he inte rpreted it as saying that now that the war is obviously lost  that fanatical Nazi is sort of becoming -- going out of his mind  losing his mind.
I remember once we came in in a place and I saw a la -- young Jewish  they fighting with a group of young Germans.
They were running Kaiserwald  for example  Germans who were not suitable to live in this violent Nazi world.
That was the sound we heard of the Nazi boots on the stairs.
I dared to say that perhaps one should think of emigrating and you know this was 36  three years into the Nazi regime.
Bu t I would say that this time  at the banquet  the prime minister of [indecipherable] looked at we five guys that were there  and he sa when he started talking  he said  I want to thank you for freeing the German people from the tyranny of the Nazi political regime  because he said  we were prisoners and didnt realize it as well as these people here at Buchenwald 25 were.
So he went after them  again just with two of his colleagues  and again a lot of paper and this Nazi looks at him and he knew who he was and he said  \ Wallenberg  if there is one man who doesn't have a paper  I kill him on the spot.\
Thats my brothers -- my -- my mothers brother  my Uncle Steffie  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0056 17comes in with a Nazi uniform  with the hackenkreuz  you know  on his left arm.
He was undoubtedly the highest ranking of the Nazi genera ls.
Wait one second  you see the Jewish people in we stern Poland  when they were occupied by Nazi Germany  they were escaping to Russia  in our territory.
In her case  I checked it out  they were not Nazi family.
So they actually invaded a former ally and we became under German Nazi rule.
But I was -- every time I heard that the school -- the Germans or -- or green police or the Dutch cooperators -- the Nazis  the Dutch Nazi  and anaspears.
And you come back to this we met at his office  and my friend was there  and his father  who was a brother to this big shot in the Nazi party.
And Himmler was looking for somebody to establish a special...a special section in the Reichssicherheitshauptamt [ NB: the RSHA]  in his headquarter  to establish an index to all persons who were suspect of being anti-Nazis abroad and inside Germany  or presenting a danger to the Nazi system.
Of course we found as we started digging  he was a member of the Nazi part y. He was forced  unfortunate fellow  he was forced into it.
Now  this civil defense work was done because they were afraid of the Nazi attack  am I right?
My grandfather in Nazi regalia  went into the ghetto  got my mother  my father  my baby sister and me out.
In March 1939  it was commandeered by General Faber  the Nazi military governor of Prague  as his official residence.
I could USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 48 not  I dont think  for her parents sake  that I could not marry Nazi family  who maybe were anti-Semitic before I changed their mind.
Somebody ask him  doe snt he feel like a Nazi by doing this.
Well  the day before  the day before my father was to report  my mother  and she is an incredible woman really - she took that Cross of Merit to the Nazi commander of our town  and everybody said don't be ridiculous - it's not going to do you any good  and she said look at what my father did for you know the fatherland  and he actually acc...he actually excused my father  thanks to her.
So that's wh at happened  so that's why I went into Nazi . . .
And my mother told me one day -- every morning there would be a line -up of all the prisoners and she said one day a very high Nazi official came to visit the prisoners and address the prisoners and that was a man by the name of Himmler  Heimlich Himmler  Hitler's second in command.
>> Bill Benson: And the real kicker here  of course  is it was a Nazi ship.
Hes older but You think the Nazi soldiers would have left him alone if he hadnt said any thing  even though they kne w the Jews were in his basement?
But I wasnt particularly aware of any more activities in Nazi Germany at that particular time other than what was going on in the papers.
Germany attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941 and it took a while sometimes for the news to get to the various places where people were imprisoned.
And it took a major effort of will to realize that not every German was a Nazi.
And did most of them ever  never join the Nazi party [indecipherable] Interview with Ralph Hockley January 12  2016 149 Well  most of them joined the Nazi party  but they were unimportant.
Also  I should accompany from the ...from the offices of the Jewish Committee to his.... T: – E: So come back now about to the time when you met him after the Nazi  the first...I mean the first days of the Nazi occupation.
They booed the Germans who were escorting us  who made us take of our caps every time we passed a building with a Nazi swastika flag.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 25 >> Bill Benson: In 1946?
And he said he needed kosher food on the Nazi ship.
Sub [indecipherable] delegation had to go back and wed come back and -- and they were very complicated issues  they were issues of -- that overlapped  because we negotiated compensation agreements which affected all vi ctims of Nazi persecuti on  whether they were 70 Israeli citizens  or American citizens  or Aust ralian ci -- or [indecipherable].
Not only did he happen to be a whiz of a doctor who had trained under Al bert Schweitzer in Africa  dealing with all sorts of problems and apparently had a repu tation as a bit of a me dical genius  but in addition he was a a committed Christian--one of the first uh of the ar ea to be committed to non-violent resis...resistance against the Nazi s--and had a special st ake in my mother's situation and this baby that she wanted to bring into th e world.
And he had also [indecipherable] so we lost a very good spy of course  within federal state Nazi police.
When the Germans started to advance  they were aided by a large contingent of Ukrainian soldiers collaborating  fighting  as part of the Nazis  the Nazi Army.
In 1941 Hitler attacked the Soviet Union and the Germans occupied marching from west to east occupied.
And he -- I really believe he was never a Nazi.
Apparently that has changed and now there is -- there is -- its been -- theres mo-more talk about the Dutch Nazi party.
The arrow on this map of major Nazi camps points to Auschwitz.
But a Nazi would see a wa tch and he tells you  take that watch and take it to the latrine with you.
Now  what the Nazis did  the S.S. come  seal his apartment  because he knows somebody else is going to try to rob it or take it over  some Nazi or Fascist  so nobody can touch it.
My memories bring me back to the 1930s  33  wh ich coincides with the rise of Hitler in Germany.
I spoke German at that time because I  my grandparents spoke German.
For instance  pilots  books  to get all kinds of things  of the -- all kinds of information about nor -- Norwegian Nazi authorities.
We had a very nice first teacher  who I -- got very friendly with me  and even after the Nazi ti -- time  she kept in touch with me  and I kept in touch with her even after the war.
And the conscription  since they didn't want to create a new bureaucracy  was -- the task of conscription was given to the Nazi party organization  which was already an existing organization with offices and so on.
On June 22  1941  Germany violated the German -Soviet pact and attacked Soviet territory.
I had a couple of best friends  and one of them this is a real irony one of them was a very good friend  but we became better friends as a result of all the Nazi propaganda  because he had he had a crippled leg from infantile paralysis.
And the response we had  the claims had to be proved in every case the individual claimant had to prove that he was injured as a result  direct consequence of Nazi action.
And they got songwriters to write some marching songs for them and it became a group which was put into the parades that the Nazis put on in Nuremberg every November to celebrate the Nazi Putsch of 1923.
24 But it is true that the day of the Nazi Plan screening I was very  it was like three months of work  it was like your movie is about to open  and I was very keen to get there.
And you -- you have to try and imagine what its like to live in a Nazi country  and to hide a number of Jewish grown-ups  Jewish children.
One thing I did see  that the elder  our elder  was decorated with a gold chain and a new suit and Nazi limousines were chauffeuring him around with the people from the Red Cross.
And when they got panicky  then they decided to intern the lot  including refugees from Nazi oppression.
So we would share with them  but if somebody sees it  ger -- a Nazi guard  that you throw some piece of bread or a cigarette  they would kill you immediately.
02:10:01 Actually  when I later stud ied it  the tactics of the Polish students were cut out of text books from the Nazi literature.
And just as quickly  I answered  in good Nazi propaganda -- and dont ask me where it came from  I simply said  ﬁI have nothing to do with this dirty race.ﬂ And he sort of had a ha-half smile on his face and said  ﬁOkay  you can go.ﬂ Whether he believed me or not  I dont know  but he let me go.
Well  she eventually had to rent out that room  and the lady must have been a Nazi because she gave me a coin for my sixth birthday  and she said  \ Soon we'll have a new picture on the coins.\
So I stopped and he said  ﬁNevermind  nevermind  I ll just sit here  keep talking.ﬂ So I kept talking and then after I had that person sign his testimony -- I think it was a witness -- and leave  and said  ﬁWould you like to work for us?ﬂ ﬁDoing what?ﬂ ﬁWell  you know  catching the German criminals -- Nazi criminals and questioning them  would you like to help us?ﬂ ﬁOf course  but only part time  cause Im working full time here  I get paid here.ﬂ ﬁOkay  Ill call on you.ﬂ So  every fi -- week  every two weeks  they would take me away for a day or two.
I-Its so little known that one of the tenets of Nazi ideology was of course that we shouldnt live.
The-These few people they had lined up the Nuremberg trials  the few hotshots  the few Nazi leaders  thats nothing.
Even German children that I would see in Bavaria  I -- I would say  I mean theres  you know  a future Nazi.
I have a philosophy you see  if possible to ma ke a compromise and I ha d to make a compromise  in school for instance  when I went to the Nazi school.
Before he came into Austria  though  did you see any of the Nazi propaganda that was anti-Semitic?
They had to they got all the records of people who applied for for something  or that came across our for one thing  across our path  and they had to have them fill out the famous fragebogen   which every German had to fill out  in which he said  you know  where he had been  when  where he went to school  did he join the Nazi party  didnt he join the Nazi party  and etcetera.
So the person who was in charge only knew how to speak French and this leader  this Nazi officer  this German officer only knew how to 27 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD speak German.
I still have it in my old passport when I -- when I left Germany.
And -- with the hand  we didn't have it -- and she  th-th-th -th-th-the -- the wife of the Nazi was after us  urrr.
We didnt hear although we knew we knew that Stalin was brutal  we knew that.
And the -- when Hitler won a great victory in the elections of 1830 -- of 19 30  then the Nazi wer -- Nazi problem and the Hitler problem became very acute because we knew very we ll  we understood very well that might affect us.
This brings us to the time when the Nazi propaganda began to become extremely aggressive and particularly then  in the year 1932  when in spite of the enormous propaganda that was being put over the German people  Hitler's popularity began to shrink.
I mean  they were so efficient in their killings  you know  and I think  I think they still are --first a Nazi   always a Nazi .
But Im sure that she as we ll as many of the other girls were members of the Nazi party.
It could never been a Nazi party because Hung arians dont qualify as -- as ethnic Germans  right  right?
And one of the Nazi officers had said to this woman who was walking up towards the pit with two children  one in each hand  that she can live if she picks one of the children to be sent into the to be shot and fall into the pit.
I understand and then you did your best to try and get the Nazi ideology out of them.
He profited from  from the camp being so nearby and from being a Nazi and collaborating with the Germans.
So this guy must have been for many years b een a Nazi  which doesnt sit very pleasant with us pleasantly.
>> Bill Benson: You went to work in a German factory.
He was th-the number one Nazi in protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia.
He was impressed by the order and discipline of the Nazi movement  a nd during the lessons  you know  sometimes he made Germany the Nazi Germany as an example of  you know  of a disciplined  purposeful society.
And the judge in the case was extremel y hostile to the idea of deporting someone for Nazi offenses.
And the German comma nder of this barrack--which was a Nazi in itself.
When the so-called superior Arian nazi race used all their knowledge  technology and skill To murder 6 million Jews merely for being born Jewish That I don't believe was God  but Hitler's demonic will.
But there was th -- there was a lot of Nazi propaganda from that standpoint.
Interview with Kitty Weiss Penner 30 Who was a member of the Nazis  the Nazi party or at least the young Yeah  he was a sympathizer.
You know  a few days before  the last time I walked in the city  it was full with Nazi party uniforms  SS  Vair markt uniforms.
How much did you know at that time about what was going on in Nazi Germany?
The people identified him wrongly and he wa s never a Nazi.
Now  of course   I had two older brothers  who were educationally very active  so I would say at age eight and nine  I was very much aware of elections  and the propaganda in elections and the Nazi party  and the Nationalists  who were close to the Nazis.
Did do you have any ot her memories of coming into contact with any of the authorities  the the Nazi authorities that took over?
There were many Czechs who occ upied high positions in the nazi government  but to what extent they influenced actually our departure of the transports  it was hard to ascertain.
I didn't want to disturb my father  so I went downstairs  I opened up and he came in  not in Nazi uniform  but in plain uniform  civil uniform an d he said to him  we have here a search warrant for your brother  Benu   his name.
Uh we've seen how important th e Nazi bureaucracy was in this  but here you see it suddenly that there's another burea ucracy which has played a very important role  a negative role  if men like like like like uh Churchill and Eden can give such instructions and nothing happened...because the l 32 bureaucracy doesn't like it.
After Hungary Allied itself with Nazi Germany  Istvan and Margit lost their jobs due to new laws restrict ing the participation of Jews in the economy.
Right after the Anschluss not much time passed when a Nazi officer came to my house.
13 13 I going into Berlin did you notice any signs of Nazi Germany and anti-Semitism?
>> Bill Benson: You wrote  yourself  in your book  \ It was a mitzvah to dance in defiance to Nazi brutality.\
>> Manny Mandel: You need to know that there is something unique about Hungary  not us  but Hungary and the Nazi government.
Yes  7 there were the Dutch like the Belgians  like the French  like everybody  there was a Nazi party.
But did it seem to you that he was on trial  too  even though he was  you know  a you know  a publisher  he wasn't actually a part of the Nazi apparatus?
If a hit occurs where a person of the same name and same birthdate as someone w ho is a suspect of being a member of a unit involved in Nazi offenses  has also entered the United States  th e research and development unit also takes several other steps to determine whet her the person is still in the United States  whether the person is still alive  and whether the person is in good health.
Things were talked about and let's say maybe I had bigger ears than some other kids and I overheard many things and I listen in on things and the word Nazi was in the dictionary  I mean in our spoken dictionary and I knew that word  I did not know it's full meaning  but I knew that word you might say as early as six.
He was a real weirdo  this guy  he didnt even -- he had a Polish name  and we -- but he was German.
As I mentioned  we had always thes e difficulties from  uh  the Nazi organization.
He was able to that through a banker in London by the name of Noah Beru who established first contacts with the German government  this is the post Nazi government saying let us try to arrange something.
The local community people who were sympathetic to the Nazi group.
You had the Nazi philosopher Rosenberg  37 you had the guy who looked like he was left with half a brain  Rudolf Hoess  38 whose look never changed.
Now  when you talk about  in other words  Nazi cooperatio n with this plan for Jewish emigration  were there in fact Jews released from conc entration camps?
Many of the people who lived in our building were Nazis or Nazi sympathizers  so they were very upset that three Jews came home.
When you see historical photographs of the war and Hitler and Nazi soldiers and the victims  does it trigger things in your I watch them.
Well  by the time I got to Germany I already had connections to a lot of the heads of trade unions who had been put in concentration camps early in the war  or early in the Nazi regime.
The Displaced Persons Act had fairly stringent restrictions on Nazi collaborators  those who assisted in persecution on the basis of race  religion and nati onal origin  from entering the United States.
And it ended up that he took a train with that money to Davos in Sw itzerland where he shot a Nazi official.
And these people  probably some of them were on the Nazi side [indecipherable] because they lost the war  not on the American side .
But yet it seems that your own tradition as a Jew and as a refugee from Nazi Germany has been an important part of your identity.
But when my grandfather found out that the Nazis were going to bomb the ghetto he asked for volunteers and he  everybody  all the men volunteered  and he took two and they dressed in Nazi uniforms.
So we -- there was just a further factor  namely the Latvian government was trying to ke ep good relations with both the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany  and this means that they purposely suppressed any kind of derogatory  unfavorable news about th-the Germans an-and th e Russians  so we didnt learn as much about some of the atrocities were going on in -- sa y in Poland  a-as we should have.
When mass murder of the Jews becomes legal Under the banner of an ideolo gy or God's sacred name Then its not the victims but the nazi murderers who did not resist Satan and defi le God's name.
And what he did -- he had a Nazi right next door who watched every step they took.
Theyre trying to be humane  and but  you know  y ou you can when you think about the Nazi period  youve got to come to the conclusion that its very hard to visualize that that many people participated in so many nasty things  period.
And I always would ask what time -- what point they joined the Nazi party  because if they joined in the late -- in the -- '44  early '45  ' 43  then they prob ably weren't convinced Nazis because by that time they had to join in order to survive.
And then that night I decided to become Nazi  a nd with the goal of eventually marrying Hitler  or becoming his cook.
They were bigger killers in in a way sometimes than the Nazi Germans killers.
In 2008  Charles and another survivor were invited to Austria by the Austrian government for the 70th Anniversary of the Annexation of Austria into Nazi Germany.
I'm told that she kept a knife under her p illow vowing to kill any Nazi who might try to come and get me or even kill me rather than to have me fall in their hands.
Afterwards  my friend Karl explained  no doubt that man had been a loyal Nazi  rewarded with a purchase of the house  bought cheaply  through blackmail and Interview with Shimon Schwarzschild April 23  2017 23 intimidation  after the terror of Kristallnacht   after the synagogue was torched.
Being with the swastika a nd over the Nazi  you know  the grey...the grey uniform with the with the swastika with all this...to look at them was...one got frightened  you see  but these men  that they came back a nd they looked at the faces of the baby  he couldn't withheld from being...they they commit...and these two women and these two babies were the only one that left from from from that hospi tal  you see  and this is...this is...we always remember it.
And then we found out that the doctor  Doctor Edlbacher  I remember his name well he was not a Nazi.
I dont kn ow whether they are any worse than I often wonder what would happen in this country if there would be gradually  as very gradually our th-the Nazi racial laws were they didnt they werent done from one day to the next.
As we noted earlier  when we were showing the slides  within seven days of Germany occupying Poland they occupied your city of Lodz and they unleashed the horrors of the Holocaust on your family and the nearly 250 000 Jews that lived in Lodz.
Of course  the war begins with Germany's invasion of Poland in September 1939  but the following spring  in the May of 1940  Nazi Germany attacked what we often call the lowland countries in France.
At one point Benny went for a meeting with the anti-Fascist committee and totally unexpectedly was handed a one million dollar check to -- to the Claims Conference that we should  with a milli on dollars  help needy Nazi victims in -- in the United States.
And it proved that the bitter end  that instead of him asking forgiveness for the injustice that he carried out  much more than the law of Nuremberg asked him to do  he stand fast to pr otect the Nazi era  and hell  to the last day  and to the last moment of that trial  stood with his opinion that it was right to do what he does.
We didn t -- It didnt mean enough to him that I had suffered and that I was not  in quote  a Nazi.
And he said that he saw in the books he used for his sermon  where he would underline certain things which subtly criticized the Nazi regime.
We sat in the back row  my mom and I. And while we were sitting in the back row on this trolley a Nazi officer came on the trolley  and he was going from row to row to row  asking for people's identity.
And he then  either that night or the following morning  gave me a slip of paper which indicated that I was arrested because of having agitated against the National Socialist Government because of knowledge of secret ammunition depots and liaison of illegal anti -Nazi organizations.
First of all  Hitler   Nazi Nazi Germany   Jews  all of that began to register on me  as I as I mentioned  I read newspapers   so I knew what was going on.
As you can see  the photos all are stamped by Nazi stamp with the usual swastika and obtaining such a passport in 1939 was extremely difficult.
Hundreds of people volunteered to go to work for the Germans.
Sometimes we think the Dutch Nazi Party (NSB) put in a good word for him.
All they said  I guess they were afraid that if I made a remark to one of my Christian frie nds  they all had to somehow belong to the Nazi party or you know things like that  because in th ose days  when a boy reached a certain age  or a girl for that matter  they had to join the Junge  Jungefrau and  and it was like a Boy Scouts.
Of course  this was the Nazi but this is what they said  so in the 29first three...after the third day of the ghetto  this is what we learned and what is ghetto all about  because we didn't know what it was about .
There wasnt a big demonstration  but we suddenly -- one of the teachers came out with a sw astika emblem  which showed that hed been - been a member of the Nazi party for quite aw hile.
They were really -- they were involved in the Nazi regime much  much  much deeper.
He was most uh instrumental because he was a pharmacy and the...was the head of the oldest pharmacy in the ghetto  and since we considered that the pharmacy is the most place that nobody will think of that there is any hidings or some contra...contrary Nazi activ ities  so we below the...below the the pharmacy where there was a cellar a nd in this cellar we arranged uh to have one...to listen to a radio from abroad.
Avi  you...you've said that afte r the Nazi invasion in June of 1941  that you went from the frying pan to the fire.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 3 Holocaust and as a survivor for about 45 minutes.
They met at the river  bec ame the border between the Nazi -occupied Poland and the Soviet -occupied Poland.
World War II began with the invasion of Poland by first Germany then Russia in September 1939.
So people were still not thinking of it so much as the Nazi party versus other things.
Did you think before going to Berlin as a Jew that maybe you shouldnt go?
There were some cases wh ere I think some of the prisoners perhaps tried to call attention to some of the -- maybe some of the Nazi guards who had put on a prisoner uniform to try to get out.
