The minute we walked out of the ghetto we could see all the special groups are all surround the ghetto with mach ine guns pointing at the ghetto like a real armed camp.
And my mother took it very hard because my brother was in a camp and there were a lot of young people still in town.
See every day they used to line up in the morning  at five o'clock in the morning in the cold winter  without any clothing  and used to  they got so many people to go to work.
Therefore  Austrian Jews returning back from concentration camp  therefore it would have been no questions asbay cause at the time  the police there  when it was  shied away from all of these things  sort of as to wash themselves of all the atrocities against the Jews they did.
There were some Jews what  what had instruments  what were already longer in camp and they had some instrument.
Maybe if you could get out to a labor camp you would survive.
But I remember they had kapos  which was a leader of the camp  and he said that he needs electricity for his bunk.
And older sister Mary  she found work for me in some bakery.
The Kapo saw it  David  and he came across running with his stick in his hand  he start beating me over the head  he said  \ ------------------  why don't you go to work \  and you know  beat the hell out of me  and then ran after me  and I ran away in the crowd  and I jumped in the car.
And you left when you left to work  there come a commission from the from th e from this place  and they check under the bed though its clean  like the military they do here I dont know what they do here  you know.
We found a bakery and we got some people who were prisoners in the camp to do the baking.
What about -- you mentioned in the camp where this guy gave you -- Yeah. --
I was  after those first two weeks  the camp -- not the commander  there was an SS man there  but the camp (spoke in German)  that means the camp first inmate.
And because of some of the problems with the early witness statements  particul arly survivor statements  we came to rely on in part  I think  because the -- of the historians work  more solidly on the documentation and the witnesses  particularly the survivor witnesses became much more important to show to the judge what it was the victims underwent as a result of the defendants participation  assistance or advocation in persecution.
Now the Polish Jews had learned that each SS occupied a village  a Jewish village or a Jewish place  and would divide the population into two groups  women and old people and children on one side and men on the other side  men being expected to work.
Then on Sunday  when we came back from work Sunday  the day off  we had to put our clothes  button up in the back and put in a lot of sand so one place we ﬂslept to another one.
Into Buchenwald we got out from the train  the SS with dogs  and they march us into the camp and they took different  -- the children they put them in different types of groups.
I could do it  because I knew how important it wa s to him  you see and I knew that it was important for him to do work that was satisfying and where he was happy.
Dad was quickly warned at work I do not know by whom.
Did you find out what the purpose was of th at camp for the women?
Uh well  after the Harrison mission...but I had started before already...we concentrated mainly in our...first of all to to organize our committee  to our committee  uh uh in other words taking in whoever wanted to be represented of the of the camp in Belsen along certain call it party line...labor and and so on  I mean the old  the old trad ition from Poland had been carried on also in Belsen  but the other...beca use also to bring all these people outside of Belsen into the fold  into the committee which means comm unities uh uh which were which were organized in cities like Cologne   and and and   Dusseldorf and Hamburg and so on  and we...we then were able  interesting enough  to uh to have a united central committee of Jews originating from Germany  from Poland  from Hungar y  from Lithuania  from wherever it was  in one institution in order to try to work on whatever the problems of the da y were.
I -- We were always talking in the camps  ﬁOh  when we come out from the -- from the camp  we will kill all the Russians.
And from there we went to Yorkshire  my company went to Yorkshire  an d -- which there w-was a big army camp  Ketray camp  and from there we went to a very nice pl ace in the -- the lake district  beautiful place where we build a -- a petroleum dump for storin g gasoline.
I could have stayed in the camp  I could have gone into a displace -- displaced persons camp  but I didnt need any other options  that wa s the one I really wanted.
At one time he was like a judge in the camp because if there were disputes among ourselves  among  in the Jewish community  it was taken care of by our own people.
Everybody had to do something else work  and we were by the commanded appointed to do all kind of...I was...I was appointed to be the main...the editor  the director of the printing business all 16 over  not on the front  for Vilna  for Lithuania  all the Baltic  all the printers and they entrusted all the...like a union all the printers the Baltic I was appointed.
And then I went to Westerbork  which was the transit camp that the Germans had established; it s in the eastern part of Holland near Zwolle.
I don't know anybody who did not not work in the resistance.
But this was a great opportunity for them to reselect the ones they missed  like children  or people who were not looking good enough for work.
You had to walk there and they were composed of uh a wooden plank  a large wooden plank and...with a with a front return and holes cut into the top of the wooden plank and there was an excavation below it and so uh when everybody relieved themselves they they would just fall through the holes into...I remember it was a very bad smell and uh I rememb er feeling very lucky that I didn't have to worry about going to work because before work there were so many people who went running there and then everybody had to wait for each other  and that I could wait to do that until after everybody was gone.
So even there  after that happened  they were charming to us  I mean I was a Miss  but the Jews could not live in that camp with the Poles.
Many people who were liberated at that time had to go to the Russian army and still in the last few months were killed on the Russian front  after surviving concentration camp for over four years.
They chose us to go and work to the Breshinka or Birkenau  these were name you are familiar with.
But anyway I came  like I said  and for the firs t six months I didnt do any work  all I did was go to cinemas.
And I think 40 or 50 came and spent some time with us  learning to work in agriculture.
She went to Minsk and I had heard they made her work in the laundry and then she went to the gas chambers in later years and that was it.
He has been teaching theology  languages and so on  and yet  he did all the garden work for the seminary at St. Thomas seminary.
We had a speaker from the Holocaust survivors who was an inmate in the concentration camp.
So I ask [indecipherable] they said she died in the camp of of-of typhus  something.
Yo u know  they disinfect you  you know  because a lot of people maybe came  had lice or whatever  this  you know  so and they took away everything what you had and they gave you the concentration camp clothes.
And his name  Arian name  not real name  Arian name  is listed as survivor of that camp.
>> Nat Shaffir: First of all  number one  they forced us to sometimes to do some manual work in cleaning stables.
A Jewish boss  he was forcing us to work on the Jewish holidays and he was a lawyer.
So this little incident what I sometimes wonder how that work ed out.
The people going to work on the airport or the they call this.
But one of our buddies was an electrician  was the camp electrician  he was from Berlin  and he used to arrange there was a short sometimes so we could toss some food to the girls.
They send me to Kulhorz and we -- the weather was so bad we didnt even work there  because it was June  right?
It was  for a DP camp it was a pretty good life what we went through.
Uh they had milk that was delivered to them for their children ever y day and once in a while there was chocolate milk because I remember my brother being in th e infirmary and the rest of us children in the camp used to line up when those Greek people got their special rations.
Some did as humanely as they could  others we re doing very harsh dirty work for the Germans.
I know i-in particular my mother i-is most proud o-of -- of Frederick Chopin a-a-and his work  but i -- I love classical music in general and have always loved Chopin.
They all had to work in factories for the war machinery.
And due to this family connection  my mother started to do a little work over over there  mostly started to kind of a a how should I put it?
So I saw the -- how do you do when they have to work to the Germans  sign for the thing  get a card.
Can you tell me about your work with the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum?
I mean why -- what -- what -- ML: Well -- What made it feel like a labor camp?
Hundred and eighty-six steps from a stone quarry  leading to the camp in Mauthausen.
Oh  the mothers  the the wretched mothers who returned from work and didn't find their children!
c.444) September  last days of Succoth  we got up as usual at 4 a.m. and waiting outside in line until 6 a.m. until it gets light and go to work.
The first couple of days I dont think we did but then we were put to work.
that [indecipherable] Thats where they always used us  for places where they needed work  slavery.
And there was one that got the paper every morning  and in it we saw that where I used to work went up in flames.
In 1946 we arrived here  in May. Let me ask you the -- th e DP camp youre in -- Yeah.
And -- And then you packed up and -- They packed us up in the middle of the night and shipped us off to a place near the concentration camp.
So anyway  he survived and then was sent to I dont know if he was sent to another camp like Dachau  before Friedlander.
And when they found somebody who didnt go to work  they took to block 25.
From there they would take me to th e camp but once they were taken October to camp already  I didnt report af ter that  I just stayed home.
And we soon had all kinds of problem in the camp with starvation signs.
You can give them cigarettes and you can give them chocolates and they will be  will be looking away  maybe.ﬂ So I went back to the camp and took my things and told my uncle who was there with me from Belgium and his son  a cousin  that I am leaving with a friend.
Now Dachau at that time was not an extermination camp but it was a camp of terror.
People went out to work and it didn't take too long they're asking for two transportation  resettlement started.
In '41  in the beginning I think of '41  they came at night and they took my older brother away for work in a work camp.
And Monday was a big sign on the door  that all Jews  women  men and children  has to stand outside the ghetto  in line  because we are going to be taken to a other concentration camp.
Says to my father  look  take a few courses  when you write an article about something and well work Interview with Guido Calabresi July 27  2017 128 it out so you get a doctorate.
I came back in May of '47  was discharge d  and I now had a G.I. Bill  so I promptly went to school  found out that I was still able to sit on a school bench and then went to work for Westinghouse in Buffalo.
They didn't say exactly where in a certain camp and then when we went down there we got a white band so that distinguished you from a full Jew  from a hundred percent Jew...the white band.
So  when they left to come to work and they used to be at work by the time we had got out of our camp and gone but they had to come past the entrance to our camp to get into the factory. [
Even immediatel y in the beginning of the war when I didn't work by baker  it was not so far so I went by foot to Alexandrov to buy some bread.
I wanted to make more money by going fast  and I was told not to work so fast  because the others didnt want to work so fast.
As far as I know  my mother was the only mother in the entire camp  to the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 best of my knowledge.
I dont remember whether they went to -- which extermina-ination camp they went to.
Uh...But they survived the war  and we were together in the camp.
It was a camp in which most of the Jewish community of Krackow was liquidated.
So I taught Yiddish music  brought me back to my music and my days in DP camp  and Hebrew and [indecipherable].
The day before we were liqui-- before we were taken back to Kovno ghetto  and few days before the total liquidation  I was doing my work and Wagner called me over.
At work we were getting -- men were ge -- getting some food at work.
So we made instruments and we made instruments for our lathe machine  for our planning 6 machine  for our blazer  the Timisoara infected was a -- have a molten  the iron started to work and we did a lot of things over for the government  for the Romanians.
He thought that I'm going for the gold  because he used to get gold from the Jews who were able to buy out their way not to work so hard only in the office.
They came...we had...uh...like about 300 people in...in our camp and they brought trucks covered with a canopy  and they put us on the trucks.
SWB: When you were first at Landsberg  were the conditions good or... BUD BRODECKI: Well  we can compare the conditions before we got there  s- comparing to that was fine  I mean  like if we go now it would be terrible but  you know  uh it's just you were at least free to a point  a lot of times they wouldn't let us out of the camp but I was different.
He always kept books and typewrite -- you know  typing and all this  so he did that and the two sisters  I -- we understood  were now in another camp that was called Mioufka and that camp housed the people from the brick factory  because it was closer to the brick factory.
And naturally  my family felt if this man is going to help us  then she has the right to help her family  and it gets to be unbelievable mess  because communicating the three men in the detention camp weren't allowed to do anything.
I know you're a little worried about your voice not being strong  but I think with the microphones it will work out just fine.
He was emotionally devastated and under the circumstances not being able to work  the rations of food which he which he was getting was not enough to survive  so it was just a matter of time and he got sick in Stuthoff  typhoid  and he died in Stuthoff.
During my sophomore year in college  she met a Mr. Stark  Mr. Edward Stark  who had been a lawyer in Europe  came to -- and had been a prisoner of war in the pol -- in the Polish army  and came to the United States and went to -- back to school and got a Masters in social work and worked as a social worker.
And he said  you work for us and I just only by chance did he come across my papers.
She had a brother there  or a father there  not working in Canada Kommando but working in Marashar which was uh  uh  people that work with the bricks and  and  and  mortar  that type of people.
We got to have also until September`15 a bridge made  and then they went to -- we went to work.
Just what I told you  that we heard through that one gentleman that they worked with the other camp that was in the city of Auschwitz  that they are going to demolish uh uh Tell me about the man  start right at the beginni ng because I don't understand it.
And then I went to work  and -- and then came the time when I -- I immediately applied to go to the United States and I was told immediately that I will not go  that they will not let me go.
Even among the -- even a-among the camp [indecipherable] in camp  you know.
And one night while he was in the concentration camp  I think it was in Dachau that he was incarcerated in  he was so hungry he couldn't sleep.
Again through all these procedure  I found out that two of my uncles died in that camp because I met their...uh...uh...uh...good friend who survived them.
Farming  mining  all kinds of work  filling holes from bombings and stuff.
When we were in the Isle of Mann in the inte -- internment camp -- as I said  we were Orthodox Jews living together  there was a man there by -- he was the son of Rabbi Spitzer from Hamburg.
As a matter of fact  I went back to Germany la st summer  and I went back to Chemnitz  and I stood where that camp was  and I recognized the ra ilroad tracks.
55 -- but they may go to another camp and bu ild  and -- and create a new ghetto  or a new labor -- labor camp  and -- and the Germans kept this ver -- that was the best kept secret.
And...uh...he used to do work  and I used to be in charge of machines.
You have to create a condition of the real concentration camp.
And we... where we're put on a freighter  on a ship; and uh  with this ship  we were brought through the Baltic Sea to another camp called Stutthof.
So th ere was a um camp that wa s being set up outside of our city  it was called Voltsehoff  uh  a uh German company I think  that was making electronics  uh  set up a factory with free  free labor  so my father through some protection was uh  and money  was able to um get to uh places for my mother and my father to work in that factory and to live on that uh  uh camp  working camp what they called.
And when they took me out  happened to be a gendarme  you know  a police man  a German police man  whom I happened to work with.
In that Latvian concentration camp we had a lot of Christian prisoners.
Wh at was basically ho -- what did you work  and -- and what was the situation in Krakow  and what did you do?
Rausonk  let me tell you something  I asked the same question of every person who was responsible in our rescue  and of anyone  I  w ho did any rescue work  even when at the premier of Shindler's List  I had the oppo rtunity to speak to Mrs. Shindler because what happened is  I was sitting with her and talking and a lady walked over and said  will you still talk to me after the film?
UNRA was the official relief organization and we were -- whatever we -- we were called  we supplemented the work of UNRA.
She wrote the director of the camp and the director gave it to me.
And these German former guards and and camp managers and so on Right  right.
When I came off the boat here and off the train in Canada  I didn't want to work in business.
I must have been already like into the fourth day of my typhus fever when Father returned to work.
They came into the camp and they said we need 50 people today  50 (204).
And then they were taken back to another camp near Perm   which is of Molotov.
Wherever they got these people  we dont know  but they were getting these people  shipping them in  to supplement those numbers that were needed for the factory work.
So I start seeing the brutality of Amon Goeth  and he said I'm going to shoot every Jew if you're not going to obey  if you're not going to work diligently  so in that time I I saw that we are in for a lot a lot of trouble.
My second brother  Jonas  was still POW by the Ge rmans but if they could get work  if they had guarantee of signed declaration that they could find wor k  they could go in the city of--society; they let them go.
But the work wasnt as difficult as it was in Buna  or was it?
And I did volunteer work at a veterans hospital up to the age that I got married.
You know  until my mother went out to -- my mother never went out to work  Im sorry.
They want the woman for the other camp and they were working the kitchens there and cleaning for the soldiers and also working other places.
So you made excellent work not out of love but out of fear?
Now when you were in the ghetto and you had to do clean up work for the Germans  did Boruch have to do that too?
The o nes you lived with l the ones you stayed in the barracks with  the ones that went through with you the whole camp  1942.
When I came back from the concentration camp  the first thing I went to was [indecipherable] to the Ponary  and I find out a ll the places where was the this  the -- the man who were  the beginning of the war taken from th e city  and this people  and the other people  and from [indecipherable] night where we were inside.
The -- I -- I -- I understand that these -- these camps were w-workers holiday camp  closed for the winter and they had opened them up for us.
DL] And  how  in terms of the Jews and that suffering being so close to you and the facilities which you had at your ca mp which were arguably better than they were at Italy and obviously certainly a lot better than anything that the Jewish victims were suffering what sort of feeling did that leave in your camp? [
So you say you were in -- in Buchen wald for a very  very short time  only -- No  I -- in the camp itself.
Well  somebody that you work -- happened to work with before the war even and -- yeah.
My scholar ship was paid by the Univ ersity but there was a foundation for Jewish girls and they were giving me $25 a week  which would have lasted except that my field work in social work   three days a week you have to be in the field.
Without it we couldn't sustain ourselves  so towards the end of 1941  they say that for to feed our family  one  a male  especially the husband  the men in the house  has to go to a brick factory or a lager camp near Krakow.
I didnt know how horrible the outer work really -- You didnt want to deal with people?
When we went out to work  we went over l and a half hours til we got there where I work was.
And he also told me that my mother was brought into the concentration camp and made to work in the laundry.
He would bring us and he would buy stuff and bring it to the factory and he would send it through people who worked in the factory  so that -- in the Shellneetsa camp and even in the Mioufka camp  we still lived on stuff and money that they would -- they w ould send in the money or some bread or whatever.
My mother  at that time was not very active in doing art but she did some commercial work  some paintings.
So we supposed to build the airplane  but first we have to build our barracks  our camp  o-our sewers an-and everything else.
For three weeks I was doing his work  he never gave me anything.
But some men were gathered to send to this town  and the other things that happened had to do hard labor in the street work.
And this was six weeks there  and after six week  we have to go to work.
Now  when Buchenwald was liberated  by that time much of my work was to well  nearly all of my work was to visit different cities or villages or camps that we had liberated  to write reports for supreme headquarters.
And after -- after my youngest son Colin was 10 years old  I went to work  and -- We-Were the earthquakes more frightening than the bombing raids in Scotland?
The other camp I don't know and I didn't find out even today  because I didn't find nobody alive from them.
And was friend of mine was a priest in the army and he thought listen  I have a very good friend which is in there  you know  this -- no politic  I -- d -- d -- the branch which s -- s -- s -- you know  send the people in different parts to the work in the army.
It was Sunday and I didn't go to work and this boy said  I have a trick to make and  I said  fine.
Because by then our father was out of work and so was our mom.
The kibbutz was also very well organized  th is was an old kibbutz and it was like a clock work.
So he went back in 1942  in the end sometimes  they liquidated the Judenlager  they brought us up to the Judenlager and made a concentration camp.
Once I told Doreen Warriner that if it were possible to do it I would try and do it and knowing that when I came back to England I would have to go back to work  the thing was to arrange the se t up in Prague which could go into operation should I be successful when I got back to London.
And after  I would say 1938  after Kristallnacht2  due to the fact that we had so many Jewish -- old Jewish teachers that were taken to the concentration camp for many weeks and months  school was every other day two hour s for many months until everybody had come back and there was a semblance of a normal school day.
Can you send me to this camp t o be with my sister ? [
In this apartment building where I was living with this woman--she was going to work and I was back from school about 3:00 in the afterno on--it was a child sleeping on the stai rs  with this big noisy can.
And that gives you the nature or the understanding that wait a minute  this is not  you know  Camp Summit.
Thats when Jews began -- were deported openly in Holland and the -- the first person who was actually called up by the -- by the Germans was my father  to -- to go to a so-called work camp.
I know where the camp was  Sky Island on the Hudson  and that was a refrain of it  everything was beautiful in Sky Island of the Hudson  [indecipherable].
And the way I understand is that they really didn't come to liberate this camp  they were just going  passing by  somewhere else  and they were attracted by the stench and wanted to investigate and see what's going on there.
He and a little boy were walking in the concentration camp  and evidently Goeth was walking towards him  and my little cousin Janek had a habit  he drove his mother crazy.
Later in 1944  Bob was sent to a satellite camp where he worked to rebuild the SS general headquarters destroyed by the allies.
I do not know whether this like that here but I remember that we had to work for three months in an institute for the blind.
The commandant of the camp said  \ I have a lieutenant who is seriously ill  and I would like to have you operate.
My mother was assigned to go to work  and sometimes she was able to take me with her.
And he said  you know  the trucks would go by  we didnt know that there was a camp there  there were thi -- they were doing this.
So and when he came home  then he was going to work there again.
And out after the war when I went to Australian New Zealand  I would like to get in touch with some of these guys that were in 24 Monowitz in the camp  but I didn't succeed.
With that orchestra  I got out I got out of Russia  and I got to we got from Persia we got to Camp Khanaqin in Iraq.
BB] Well  I think  I dont think there was one in our camp.
So I didnt tell anybody in the camp  my friends  that I made up my mind Im not going to go  I going to escape.
In this camp  throughout the war  through out our working time  there were Greeks  Italians -- by the way  the Greeks and Italians may have been Jewish but I have no way of knowing because we couldn't communicate.
So are you telling me you were never in a DP camp?
At one time there was a young man working in a camp  supervised by a group of Nazi officers.
At night  after everybody -- after the -- the -- the battalions went back into the camp  the -- the -- the -- the ch -- the chain -- the guard chain was taken back  and they -- I dont know whether they were offered [indecipherable] anyway  the -- the main camp.
Yes  it was hard  very hard work for very little food  and was living with hope that tomorrow will be better  but never -- the day never came.
At least some work to do and maybe we'll get better food because when you work you have to get food.
Bars  slight ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 clothing  and work.
12 Tape #2 02:00:15 Well  we're back to Sundays being very special because we did not have to go to work in the factory.
And the government went to work and two months  wasn't the Germans but the Hungarians  picked up 150 000 people  in two months.
And of course Itzhak Klein was lucky later  he got into the fire brigade  and he was doing bette r  but he had -- the food that he could spare  or -- or got through channels  he would give to his niece who was in the -- in the womens camp in Auschwitz.
Oh  it started I guess right after the war  after I was liberated  because we work hard  we slept  we didnt have enough hours.
Uh I particularly want to talk about my friend Yelda for a moment but that actually happened in in another camp.
Draft age Jewish boys were put into these notorious labor brigades  doing horrible work  including mine cleani ng wa -- with their bodies.
I could not get i n. The only way I could get into the Warsaw ghetto is with a group of people who went out from the ghetto to work.
It will be possible to make a...to exist  rather than in the camp.
The other two kids they couldnt reach because they were a different place of work.
Could you tell us how you were told that you They were told they told us that was end of 43  that we will have to move out in one camp.
And I thought  among the so-called leadership -- not only the triumvirate whose names came up so often earlier -- but  you know  members of the executive  members of the leadership ranks; a good deal of the motivation was that of personal ego  rather than  you know  the desire to do a good work.
Did you have any contact with those  with the victims of the concentration camp?
But we want to get permission from the Kommandant to pray  after our work.\
03:06:33 In Munchen  out of the cam p. I didn't like that camp life.
And then  three days after we were incarcerated in the ghetto  they finished the the the barbed wire fence around the ghetto and the gate and then three days...and they every day they gave Jewish committee head to mobilize Jewish work ers for the various German places to to clean the barracks  military barracks and the Gestapo uh building  to clean the pavement  to...tailors  uh pressers and all kinds of things.
But some of them  later on in Estonia the children went to work. ---------------
The funny part  like I said  the situations I was in I thought I wouldn't survive  and this was another one of those situations and this labor camp  for some reason  I have no idea for what reason  I and another couple of women that needed to take care of some teeth that had to be pulled were picked with one S.S. woman and we were taken into Hamburg into a prisoner of war camp to a doctor there.
And after several days were sent to a Aufangslager reception camp at Ayresfield  Berner Oberland.
And it was snowing and cold outside and some of them came from work.
But I personally  when the children on the cart  when they were carrying in that camp  this is what I couldnt take it.
And of course they objected vehemently to the barbed wire around the DP camp.
They go register because they have no way to live  like in the city have no no food or nothing so so they go...some people went and went to Germany to work.
Those were not days of great commun ication but my father did know about a camp by the name of Dachau which has become infa mous.
He come on a bike into the camp through the gate; and as soon as he entered the gate and got deep enough  a group of young boys went at him and stabbed him to death.
Well I guess one thing I was -- Im -- I was al so asking is that how -- how were the small ways -- what were the smaller things that you did on a day to day basis in the camp that kept you going?
No idea that it would...that there would be...I did not comprehend at the time  but I know that when the Germans invaded Poland and my mother  who I'm sure was very smart  wanted to come to the to the United States  and we had one aunt  her sister   the only one  in Cleveland  so I ended up in Cleveland  but it didn't work out.
Until one day when I got a phone call  would I please appear in police headquarters outside the Balutski Renneck   and there was Rumkowski  and he told me that I would work in the evening kitchen together with 40 other young wome n my age who had been for six months in the womens police corps  and they wore uni forms just like the men.
Used to go to nearby a -- you know  hills  and ski down and -- How would it work?
After awhile they liquidated the ghetto  and transferred all men to the railroad camp.
But the third time  it didnt work anymore  and. . .
I was taken to Stutthoff concen- tration camp and all those women who had little chil- dren they were after several days in Stutthoff they were sent to Auschwitz.
448 After building the spur around Krakow  we  as a group of people forced to work were moved to Skarzysko-Kamienne.
The Jews considered the Baltics  peo- uh the  not really victims of the Holocaust  that many of them had come to Germany volun tarily to work.
Walking in front of this  uh  [third] department of the labor camp  which we didn't know who they are--these people  they start to yell to us and curs...cursing us.
But I tell you  I have -- I had very few dreams wer -- were a-about the concentration camp.
Before that when I was working  it was charity work and whatnot.
And when he left  she came in and she says  good work guys.
The army there specifically asked Holocaust survivors  preferably concentration camp ho su-survivors that have also been in the U.S. military  preferably in military service.
The brother who continued the family busin ess for a time was dragged off and killed in the concentration camp at Gross-Rosen.
And we'll pick them up 7:00 o'clock in the mrning every day and take them to the airport to work.
Uh  I radioed in to the captain  uh  that we had come to the barbed wire and some kind of a camp.
And I think I was born Im Im registered in 1932  when I was in DP ca 30 1933  when I was in DP camp  either I was not totally understood when I gave the dates  or I was just t it was just written down for convenience  be cause if you were younger or older  you went on this ship or on that ship.
And we took them into our camp  and Mrs. Schindler was cooking cereal for them every day.
They would shoot us like we were dogs  and uh  we had no weapons  we were weak  and you  you couldn't fight  fight an army with bare hands  but I feel that every day that we lived in concentration camp and we survived it  to me was a heroism uh by itself  because we made it and we su rvived this terrible life we had there  and by resi--by this we resisted Hitler to show him that we are here to  to stay  and he could not finish the race of the  of the Jewish people  and I feel by that  we resisted.
So just to clarify  you're saying that y ou were one of the first to come into the camp because there were no other soldiers around?
I was taking basic infantry basic training in Camp Croft in 1943.
And they would come as day laborers to work on this Day.
CR-7  TAKE 8 beep What choices could one make in the camp that could help you survive?
Then I found out about the city of New York and I went into the Social Work Sy stem with the city of New York.
Throughout the war  Alex and his sister Madeleine were able to attend school and summer camp and lived a relatively normal life in Villefranche until September 1943 when the German crackdown on Jews intensified.
We went to Leicestershire and there was a sort of an ad hoc training camp for paratroopers.
And certain places  you know  you work so  sometimes  you got an extra piece of  you know -- there were some Germans that werent too bad.
My mother told me that there would be a lineup every morning in the concentration camp.
But that was the town and -- and Starachowice did not have Jews living in -- in it  because the Jews were not allowed to work in the factory  strange as it might seem.
You see when we were liberated already and I ran away from that lady and I didn't want to work with her  so and we were talking about Lublin so my mother took my twin sister and she bought her a ticket to go to the older sister where she was in Warsaw  and this is for the first time that she knew that we were alive and that she is alive and she was there and we brought her to us where we were together where my mother was when everybody was running away.
My mother was still in bed  was getting ready to go to work.
Somehow  the dates didn't work out  but we still have in mind to do that.
And they to ld us what a concentration camp is  because some of them were even relieved just under one condi tion to leave Germany  y eah.
But I also assumed that due to us communicating with the men behind us  that all of a sudden everybody in the battalion would be coming into the camp and taking a look at all these horrors that we saw.
So that was great news  so I somehow managed to get back to Bergen  to the DP camp.
In 1930...uh...in 1926  I entered Franklin and Marshall College  graduated in 1930  was admitted to the Graduate School for Jewish Social Work  which is no longer in existence.
I could go to the French camp an d talk with the guys.
They fed us good and asked us to work on their cars.
>> Bill Benson: When you finally make it to Germany  you go to a displaced persons camp  and I think you spent three years at the displaced persons camp.
And the whole town knew what happened  so when I was came to work and all start to say  Francisca  what's happened at church toda y. Oh  I say...what's happened.
And they made all the prisoners do the work for them.
My class  out of the 50 we had 18 Jewish girls and we were fighting because by the time we grew -- we were growing into first [Jewish low Hitler] and some girls in the summer went to Germany to camp  others had the Nazis of Hungary with rings on their hand and we were fighting fistfights with them. [
Remember  except for those in Britain whod been throw the Blitz  so wed had some kind of upheaval in our lives  the average American who came later to work  had had no upheaval.
And we took an apartment in Bratislava  but then it was dangerous  especially in after it was the partisan uprising in August 1944  in Banskebisatran   Slovakia   so we have to leave Bratislava  and then where we went I went with my father and my sister to Nova Vestu nad Vahom  from there then we went actually to concentration camp.
And I was supposed to be with them  but the -- the young ones like myself were taken to this Bittenburg to work in Arando  and they separated us.
And he was a heavyset man  and I remember hed come in and everybody who was in the shift -- the worst shift by the way  was night shift  because that means you were in the camp all day long.
I'll take the facts down as you give them to me and present them back to our finance officer and then he may be in touch with you and you can work it out between yourselves.
All the camp inmates were working in it -- of for ced laborers from occupied countries were there  and POWs were also there  and we re working.
I didn't say that my my original name in Poland was Salzman and uh that means salt man and my...I  as I recall the story of I heard from my father  my ancestors lived in that village  that town  and their business was to buy and transport salt to the neighboring countries and when in the late 17th century or maybe it was early 18th century  the tax 10 officials decided that everyone including Jews must have last name for tax purposes  and they just called my...they assigned a name to my great-great-grandfather uh that he had...uh that was associated with his occupation  so that's where the Salzman came and it was at that town that this camp was located  with most of the prisoners working in the salt mine.
So they invented this idea that he went to look for work.
We came to Berlin  and we were in a DP camp.
It was seven o'clock  eight o'clock when outside at work  outside we hear bullets going here and there  here and there.
And so we have no the possession of letters  before dated  compared with the date of  of  with the date of death of thos e people  while they were gassed  so we know only now how they were luring and pretending inside of the camp  the whole situation  to prevent disorders or disturbances.
Ironic enough  we went back 3 and a half years ago to Poland  to Birkenau  and we went to the camp where I was in  the coal mine   the ------------.
If I see never you know  sometimes you ask people  how long were you in the camp?
That why we were transferring friends constantly to those parts of -- of the camp where we knew they will never be exposed to the selection.
That it's going to be a normal life they start to say  and we're all going to work together  everything is going to be alright.
Then they wanted to send the girls to work in the meat factory.
And after four years of work  and getting people from all over the world to cooperate  last year we unveiled 24 bronze tablets with the names.
And once we'll get here  we'll work and we'll give him back the money.
They permit them to talk to the authorities of the camp  and they presented this  that we are the volunteer.
End of Tape Two 46 Beginning Tape Three So youre in the camp of Agde.
In our factory there were like fift 50 between sic 50 and 70 workers All from the forced labor camp?
No  there I was in charge of the guests who would come and the store -- the camp store.
I became -- I went as a counselor with Camp Hamar and my marriage broke.
Every other camp had different forms of identification  usually Jewish stars sewn on.
My brother Haim  he was a dentist and he was first in a labor camp.
Interview with Adam Szymel January 25  2015 92 Well  except the some of the people worked in the that baza place  they would be in touch with some Russians up there  but otherw ise  there were very few Russians that would come to the camp.
And next to this guy is an Israeli soldier who served with the British Fifth Army  who was the head of the group who came to take the kids out of camp to bring them to their own camp.
So anyway  the kapo said they were going to come and select us  they needed 250 girls for the working camp and they took you to a different area  different camp  a different area and again they showered us  oh God  again  naked and disinfect you.
But it was -- most of the work inside the camp was taking workers around.
And when he came back  I was at the time teaching at camp.
And then we had some younger childrens in the camp that...uh...we tried to protect them from not working in the...uh...with the regular labors that they go there and do some odd work there...uh...that the children could do.
35 You had mentioned that you had contact with women in the camp.
And then  I think it was towards end of ‚42  then we were concentrated in Plaszow  Patkusz [ph] Plaszow  the concentration camp  and we went to work to Kabelwerk from Plaszow.
I don't to work for the Germans  and disappear I said.
How did the SS and the camp personnel respond to romances  relationships  inside the camp?
The 4th Armored Division was a New York Division and organized at Camp Pine.
By the time she decided  it was too la te to get papers and she was eventually put in the Riga ghetto in Latvia and then from Riga  she was then put into labor camp in Stutthof and through the Holocaust Museums library  we were able to get in touch with a place in Stutthof  a -- a museum that they erected on the camp  that Stutthof camp and they sent us copy of a page of a ledger which shows her name and her date of death in Stutthof  in a camp.
I became a professor also here at the University of Illinois  where from time to time I have been there and I work there.
And a little -- I learned a little Jewish in the camp  too  from the Polish Jews  you know.
And they disarmed all these Germans and the Hungarian SS and they took over the whole camp.
I worked there for a whole two weeks  but at the end of day every day  the girl who supervised the work  came over ripped out what I did  because I didn't know how to use a sewing machine.
Now  simila rly  similarly  when two months after I came back  so  when I came back to work in 1941  say in early November  by mid-December  the  Bucharest gave the order to give us food .
All right  so  but then  what Im trying -- what Im trying to do is figure out what -- what is the function of the camp office?
Well -- Well work for him  well help him out  because after all  he was all alone.
We started to teach people how to ride on tractors  how to do 52 farm work  while we provided this farm work for free.
He said  ﬁOh  people work here 20 and 25 years.ﬂ And he told me you can survive you working in the mines.
Thats what was told from the youngsters who came  that were gonna have to work.
So I was there  and I worked there  and then later on I found out about my -- not relatives  but I found out about my frie nd whom I knew before the war -- not before the war  but actually during the war  before the concentration camp.
But the reason for that was that one of the 13 had found 50 out afterwards said we had been sentenced to be hanged  and somehow or other the -- the instruction got lost  and thats the reason why we got into the camp  we got this strange number.
And that's this thing what had happened the following the day when I came to work -- do we have enough time?
So peopl e doing this kind of work were called gandy dancers.
In Prague there was a camp for the children  you know  not far from Prague  which was called Jablitz .
Ther e wa s only a fear of being transferred to a different camp.
Put them in the elegant passenger cars  and took them to the prisoners camp in in Canada .
What else do you So now that youve retired  are you doing any volunteer work or I did not because I retired in 2010.
That it didn't  you know  nobody came to  to line us up and to take us out to work.
I -- In a way  I started with tha -- doing these nextashear  put a lot of work into them.
They looked for a young teacher who  I had about twelve other young teachers with me and it was in Budapest  it was just a day camp  and it turned out to be such a good experience that the local Communist Party secretary asked me if I would like to come and teach in the district.
Now my answer and her answer combined is that wh en the barrack was assigned for the administrative  administrative work details  to work and to be housed there  it was very a negl ected one  the male prisoners left for the male camp and we were assigned to that ba rrack  which was Block four  a wooden barrack.
We 8 figured there is the mechanics thing and there we were going to work.
Your mother  did she also go to work or did she stay home with the other.
So we were rely we had to rely on what was in the camp.
So in Dachau we just took all our clothes off  we ha d to get the clothes which they use in the concentration camp  the striped clothes.
I mean  you drove into a camp  and you were greeted with piles of corpses  maybe up as high as this the ceiling here.
They got lists what they had to take along  because they were going to a camp to work and to  uh...they had to bring their own clothes  all things well-known by now; so my par...my father bought them and bought  uh  backnaps and he bought  uh  clothes and my mother sewed the tapes and we each had one; and it was already there all the time  as for all Jews  not only for us.
They put chains on my legs  and chains on my ar ms  and I was transported into a concentration camp called ----------------------  they were right next to the ocean.
One of the policemen  the Polish policeman  we gave him five thou I gave him 5 000 zlotys because he promised that he will let him that he will work.
We had heard in getting the directions that this was a special camp that the -- the Germans had operate d. So we made a little detour on our way to Munich.
When you were in hometown and you were working  shoveling snow and doing all kinds of work from '40 to '42  how were the Germans treating the Poles  that is the non -Jews?
And they always took out the people who were old or sick or couldnt work anymore and they took them out and they gassed them.
She was fairly young woman yet  you know  the man comes back after  you kn ow  so many years from a labor camp and then he -- 99 percent he spends in bus iness  you know  and on e percent with the wife.
And  uh  so it's it was very dangerous that an  an  SS what kills any people sometimes took me out for  for work to do  but...that was  I don't know why  it was just my luck perhaps.
Well  I did very little of that work  because I had a full time job at all times and doing something else.
Im interested because I lived this period; I know that right now from history was a criminal camp.
It wasnt like a lifeline or anything like that  but you know  you couldnt think about the camp all the time and death and dying and Auschwitz and the gas chambers.
And I knew on Yom Kippur in 1943  a transport came to our camp from Graben...from Auschwitz  and among the women that came were women from our ghetto and they were different.
05:13:03 I should add  unrelated to me and unrelated to Fohrenwald  on about May the ninth  there's riot in the camp at Landsberg.
It became pretty obvious in the winter of 1944 as it turned to 45  when um  uh there were fr-a frequent um we heard plan es coming in and  and uh  uh production stopped  and things were  were getting bad  and then on the night of the 28th  rather the day of the 28th of January  45  we did not go to work.
J7;6t And I remember after quarantiner they took us to a children's barrack in the...theD -Lager  which was a working lager  working camp.
He behaves to us very well  except that when you go out to work and come back you have to Do you know his name.
Whenever she comes down here -- she was here recently and she did a lot of beautiful artwork and have it in -- and she gave me a lot of her work.
He said youre going to work with me and youre not going home with anybody.
And then we had some Jewish supervisors su pervised by German guards who were working outside the camp.
First  we didnt have like a typewriter in camp at first.
What I did  actually  when the camp was closed  I had to go back to my family because I was sick.
>> Sylvia Rozines: When we went to Berlin  right away we went to the camp which was American.
That was -- well  when Martin returned from the concentration camp  livid -- This is after?
What was your first encounter with the museum before you went to work there?
Within a month  they were transported by the Nazis to the Bergen -Belsen concentration camp near Hannover  Germany  in preparation for the eventual departure from Europe.
Inside the camp we were ruled by criminals  by German criminals who were also prisoners in the camp  but they were above us.
So in some strange way  you were fortunate to be in this work -- this gulag rather than Janofska [indecipherable] Well  I was fortunate because  you know  being there  you know  they -- they didnt -- this was the time where they didnt empty labor -- labor camp.
So as a result of that  I had to work to make a living and for the past 25 years  I've been in the same place.
No  I became a citizen of Leadville  Colorado  which was right near the camp.
So when I went from one camp and another and the Feldafing camp and I went to and I went to .
We got off and that was the first Schlactensee camp that we k -- arrived at.
But Ravensbruck really was the most famous one  but nobody– it wasnt really a camp for us anymore.
You stood for roll call  and then you went to work?
And I suceed  managed with a doctor th at he gave to my wife injection and he was as some signs of typhoid fever and they took them one  one night before the liquidation of the camp  to this block  to this infirmary  ep idemic block 32.
And they called it already like a Straflager [Ger: \ punishment camp\ ].
They needed so many people or something and they took them from one place and then they shipped them somewhere else so that maybe they wind up in a concentration camp  but they did not come to this town and take out so many on a train or whatever it is and send them to concentration camp.
He started out in -- in Stopnica  then he -- 6 as he grew up a little older  he -- he took off  he didnt stay in this -- in the -- in tow -- in little town  he went to different towns  bigger towns  to work  to achieve something  he ca -- I dont know.
Uh  you know  in comparison to have to work in camps like we did in -----------.
They were looking for allied spies  they were looking for -- you know they had millions of foreign workers in Germany also  th ey had been forcibly deported to work in the armaments industry.
I meet a guy from Germany that way back from Germany I used to know from the ca from the camp  from the concentration camp.
I ha d been sent to the summer camp as did  my second sister was sent.
Occasionally  the accountant when we walked to work a Yiddish POW contingent I see.
In February of 1944  '45  a call came into the camp that on a siding not far from our camp the Germans left carloads of people just to die.
We went down by train  from Camp Ritchi e  down along ŠŠ they had the west shore line of the New York central railroad at that time.
Being that I came back to Slobonov I wa s on my place of work  watching the cars on the outside.
Do you remember the work that you were doing at the time?
174 Because the camp office had a lot of Pole -- Poles  non-Jews.
So now I would like to tell  I have first been in the ghetto in resjur  then I was in the brick factory in mishkoltz  we were taken to Auschwitz  I was in the Birkenau lager  and the camp was named B3 which one was meant a camp of elimination.
And so my older br other works for the pants factory there  and I work f -- and I was working for the uncle.
But all of a sudden  in most cases on a Sundays  cause everyone was in  in the camp.
So  in any case  they come and said  \ If you will volunteer   we will not \  quote/unquote  \ resettle your parents  your relatives in the camp.\
Now  my family became part of...of this Bergen Belsen  the Kosner group as they called it...uh...because my brother and I were very active in Zionistic work and the people knew that so whoever was in charge of this Kosner group they said...though I wasn't home at the time...I was probably in the Ukrainian at the time already...they said  \ Though (that's my Hungarian name) isn't home  we cannot forget...uh...Ella and...and their...their son  Emmy  and they...they were engaged and my brother-in-law's still there as a Rabbinical student he was not taken into...into labor camp.
They're gonna select thousand woman and take them to...to that work  do those trenches.
And he learned later on that my uncle had been to the bus to the people to the camp.
To characterize the work that we do  we do everything from pr enatal care to care for the aged.
No  I said the dynamics between your team members  among themselves  the 35 or whatever  yeah  especially in view of what you just told me that there were DP people and there were Germans and then there was the Army  so how did all that work?
People came with sleds from a camp  with big kettles of fish and cabbage soup.
And I knew we would go back to work on the Klan case  probably  and that there would be an opportunity for her to come down.
indecipherable] But just -- I think a few of us work more than others  for good reasons.
Did you have a sense that th is camp was highly organized?
So  when we got into subsequent discussions  I remember some people I considered racist in the poverty program  saying  you know  wed come out of the building from work and there would be some news headlines out in the street  and they would say that Stokey Carmichael   or Rap Interview with Peter Masters September 25  1998 83Brown  arent they awful troublemakers  what have you.
So at least I know that my older sister wind up in the labor camp to go [indecipherable] the rest  my father and my mother and my sister  they went to the crematoriums  ovens.
My mother was part of this underground movement and during the day quite often when she was at work  my house looked normal.
And um...uh regardless of your beliefs or  you know  race or whatever  you can really achieve whatever you want if you really want and work hard  you know.
All of the servants had to be let go  gentiles were not allowed to do work for Jews  and so the three ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 9 lieutenants clicked their heels and said \ Madame  I understand that you had let your servants go.
Often during the time when the men were at -- at work  this Gorajetski used to come into the ghetto and circle two or three street  take all the women out into the -- into a place  and ask for gold.
But And you said how long did you how many years did you work for the navy?
And ye and you your documents allowed you to start looking for work like free people  is this it?
And so Colonel Clark   he was a colonel major he was General Clark at Colorado Springs there  the air air academy there later on  but he was a colonel in our camp there at south compound.
She was taken  she was liberated at the Danish border after going from one camp to another as the German Army retreated.
Yes  it is 57 years ago  when my parents and sister were murdered in the gas chamber of camp Sobibor.
He just came from the concentration 20 camp and wasn't used to working I guess because in Romania the one guy they weren't toughened up like we were already.
They had their -- now  in those different work details  you had an structure.
Because every outside work brigade had the opportunity to buy food  except the airport.
As a matter of fact  when we started school  I flunked the first year because I never did my home work.
I remember going to work in Germany and kids would be -- you know  near their picket fences in the house.
So  well  I got typhus in Bergen-Belsen and Paul LaPietra  one of the Frenchme n stole food and send it to the camp.
And sure enough  because Mengele used to work in our camp.
One day in December okay then one day I was working and it was almost the end of the oh  I I have to mention mention that once a month we were taken on trucks to Camp A  which was the main camp.
So what they did is they orga nized their crews so that about two-thirds did the work and one-third were released to given ex-extended leave to go into eastern Europe to either visit the s village or city where they came from  and to help Jews to organize  in order to get to the American zone  because th-there was no future for Jews in eastern Europe .
Th ese youngsters  I received a little time ago  I received from Poland a book who said exactly what Im not about me  but about the youngsters that all these people who went who were taken out of this camp  were sent back to Auschwitz and they all gone  all was exterminated in Auschwitz  and it was something.
And there they took away all the youngsters and of course  disabled people and old men who could not work and my brother was taken away at that time.
I work in this factory  on an assembly line  and I as I am closing the boxes  I am reciting Polish poetry.
speaks foreign language here] [speaks foreign language here] I: They had  in  inside  what I said  inside activities like food distributions  looking after the children  they had a little bit of cultural activities because there wa s nothing else to do  but there was no physical work performed  like in our so-called [sp eaks foreign language here] [speaks foreign language here] I: The tragedy was that they made no use  du ring a war  where manp ower or womenpower was short to use the young family members  me n and women for someth ing productive  yeah?
33 No  no  in Auschwitz -- and I found that out later on  that you had to work there before they tattooed your arm  and we didn't work there.
I was probably still weaker than the other girls there beca use I had come out of the hospitals  and they were not -- they came directly from the camp.
>> Bill Benson: To what extent do you think what you went through had any bearing on your choice of a career to work with abused children?
See  my memory of Russia isnt that strong any more  you know  but of Austria and Hallein it still is  you know  and then the and we went to Hallein and tried to find where we knew the camp is gone  you know  I mean  but we tried to find where it was.
Dont believe that something like this could exist in the camp.
There was a tower  one tower near the gate where they watching  and as I said  they were taking people to work and from work  and they were transporting whatever had to be transported.
My mother in the camp  she wa s sterilized so she would never have they way they put it to her -- so there would be no more Polish bastards born in the world.
And in order for them to get their rations of food  which was a big kettle  like  where the soup was in  they had to go to the women's camp to reach the kitchen.
Germans took us to work  put us in the crematorium because that was the Fuhrer wanted them to do and they claim they had to believe in his philosophy and his -- that (indecipherable) people.
It was not Polish  but we knew that i-in Germany there were many work ers -- farm workers taken from Russia  from Ukrainia  from Belarus.
She told us about Ausc hwinschen (ph# 4424) but this wasn 't yet that they were gassing or things like that but just that it's a terrible camp.
Please tell me about the work that you do for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
7 he was detained in Amersfoort for two weeks  not just as a Jew but as a Jew who merited special punishment and after two weeks in Amersfoort he was sent to Westerbork and Westerbork on the borderline between uh between Holland and Germany was a transit camp to which people were sent when they were first arrested and from there the transport went to concentration camps in Germany and in Poland.
I took an instant dislike to him  and I would often work in the building on my ow n. I -- I -- Im a slow worker  and I often -- and I still do it  I work late and long  and I would often be in the building on my own and hed be stoking the -- there was like a furnace  an old-fashioned furnace where you burned wood to heat the boiler for hot water and so on.
One of the situation  somebody in concentration camp helped me very much  and I took the job there where was only dreaming of the job  working in the hospital.
You knew my reputation  the work I was doing and I know that what we were looking for wasn't only capacity to minister programs  but also the tact necessa ry to deal with the army  with Unrah  with committees and in those days there weren't ma ny people who were commonly organizers.
My mother -- when we were in a displaced persons camp  they had already theaters and we could go to the theaters and the music   in Germany  after liberation.
Then we had all these ni ce reports prepared by me  Nowitz  by a few other guys  Slotnick was another lawyer who came on board  and we had a fellow named Briggs who was a lawyer went up to Bost on; these were enlisted men and they did all the work.
They took us about two hours from our home town to the first war camp.
So  one day they when everybody went to work  and some reason I I I was home and then they doing something.
And also in 1940  when the Russians occupied Bessarabia   a strong tendency existed between the to leave for Soviet Union because it was said that anti-Semitism was not so strong there and they could be able to find to work  which wasn't true.
I got an order for I think it was 50 ovens for the concentration camp in Oranienburg  near Berlin.
He was the commander of one thousand prisoners who were maurers  uh learning how to lay the br icks uh and to make it work for building the huge  uh  for the building of this huge crematorium for creamatory which were at that time in building  had not been built. (
And that's where the workers ...uh...got into the camp and these camps  they were erected overnight and...uh...that's where my brother was taken to a work camp at the 1940.
Somehow Im dissatisfied with people who right now go out and theres no not enough work in Poland  so when they can go anywhere in Europe to to work  they do.
Two weeks later we couldn't be anymore with the women there b ecause it became a concentration camp.
So  what were the other resources to survive  then to work or stay with other families.
So the apartment changed in a way  and Dad did this that is to say  did this kind of work from 1934 until my parents left Germany in the spring of 39.
So I live with the -- End of Tape One  Side A Beginning Tape One  Side B This is a continuation of a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Gerda Haas and this is tape number one  si de B. Can you tell us about -- can you tell us about how you observed your faith when you were still in the camp?
We had problems for awhile  and hoping that the United States will help us  but -- moving away from families  but it didnt work.
I not fight in my life too much and during the concentration camp I fight with fellow the same age like me.
48 R.L.: Renatas advisors father died right after the war  not in a concentration camp.
And he vouched for him a nd he gave him money that he could go in that...ﬂ which at that time was only a detention camp and not a...later became that terrible camp.
Though I was told that Majdanek for some reason ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 is not termed an extermination camp  I call it an extermination camp because everyone I knew in Warsaw was gassed there.
And my dad had already been told that he was going to be the school teacher either in Theresienstadt or in the camp that Anne Frank was sent to  the first  the concentration camp.
So I says to him  I said  ﬁListen  is my work as good as theirs?ﬂ He says  ﬁYes.ﬂ I says  ﬁI want the same type of pay.
The camps were serviced by the British  but they employed Greek  Greeks for cleaning the camps  providing provisions to the camp  so there was a daily 13 There were five camps near Famagusta and seven outside of Larnaca.
And the Museum does wo rk in B ahasa  the language of Indonesia  and Al is a close partner in that work.
So when we after our interviews  and when we started the training program  we felt we  you know  we really had done the right thing and we would we would we would want to do the kind of work that the museum could provide us.
My pl an was if Ill come dow n to the camp  Ill bury myself under the truck.
So  since I was not working outside the camp  but I was working in camp and he was moving freely in camp  he spotted that cute little girl and somehow  some way  we started talking  holding hands.
Got beautiful waterfalls  and the movies  everything they give special tickets  they used to have shows  and anybody from the DP camp used to go in with half price.
There were people in the camp who stole -- were in a position to steal and did of this little food.
I had lost 10 years  between the concentration camp  going to Morocco  going to [indecipherable]  going to the Israeli army.
You know  the work was...the...it was...the each one had to dig so much and and and the...you had to make your order what they have ...let's assume they give a yard to dig out.
No  I never -- never run into anybody bi -- in the camps  because it was a small camp.
So the girl s smuggled out ﬂafter work and they gave it to the men to through the wires you know.
Can you talk to me about how you feel or maybe don't feel that support systems  families and friends  who were in the camp  helped you as a fo rm of resistance?
And at that time I felt that -- I dont know why  but there was a DP camp by the name Benzheim and that was between Darmstadt and Frankfurt  and very close to Heidelberg.
I: Every work detail  every barrack  had an SS man in the camp  in charge  w ho signed for anything.
From th e hospital anyone that was in relatively in good health was taken to the...was taken to Treblinka concentration camp or as I cal l it destruction camp.
What did -- what -- 36 I mean we had -- they had celebrations throughout  its not like -- the ki -- the camps -- It wasnt a specific -- -- the camps  it -- the camps developed  and this is the -- the -- the -- the beauty about the Jewish people is the ability to bounce back from utter despair and -- and grief is -- is amazing  because di -- dont forget -- I mean  I was in the first camp a year or half a year after the end of the war.
I give you lot of work  not one thing  lot of things.
>> Bill Benson: Tell us about the work that you were forced to do since you were selected to labor.
And my birth date I obviously intended to give 16th -- April 16  1929  somehow it - two of the numbers got mangled  but clearly I -- I was use -- always using my sisters birth date when I -- whenever I needed a birth date in Buchenwald and throughout the concentration camp.
There was also a very big stench  you know  because there was this camp was was dev devastated  you know.
And he was saying there to a young girl  who he sometimes he rested in...in her barrack; because it was the last barrack on the camp  and he used to come with the kommando there.
What was going on  what kind of work he was doing?
And I probably did not work the whole day from morning evening  that I dont remember  but I enjoye d to work  and to do things and of course weekend we always went away  a group of people.
And I said  \ I did always to the best of the people and the running of the camp.\
The work was more or less the same  working around the clock.
My work was always with Timisoara   but I heard Yegendorf was -- they had formed committees.
When I was in the camp I kept thinking how nice it would be on liberation day y et this day finally arrived after so many years of suffering  I felt alone.
It was a camp about  I would say by train an hour away from Munich.
So  he founded we called a resort  a factory  a place to work.
And--and it's I finally got a job work- ing in there.
Tell me a little bit about your father and his work.
They said we have to go bring some food for the camp.
He told me hi s story w as a little different since he was in a concentration camp.
My name at birth was Julian and actually my middle name Jacob  and my father and mother decided to call me Julian because they wanted an international name and they thought Julian  if I ever went -- were to travel  would work well.
The factory fro m the camp was approximately between two and two and a half kilometers which was very deep into the woods.
And so they didn't have the true judgment of our work  but when they have seen that we really were not working what they have beaten us.
And I was focused on my work and being single and living in Philadelphi a and having a good time when I wasnt working.
And then the camp was evacuated and you were all taken on a death march to -- to Dachau.
Well  I called out the troops  separated them  closed the camp  moved all the Jews back into the camp  and I realized that was a mistake the way I handled it.
And one evening  this must have been in late November  it was dark already and we are coming back from work and at the gates we are counted and the SS is relieved and the gate is being opened and the SS around are watching that everybody goes in and ahead of us is standing another work detail and they are being frisked one by one by one  by a row of maybe four or five SS men.
So instead of spending the day in the orphanage where I could get my good meals  I went to work so I could get some cash to buy a bread and smoked fish and bring home.
She -- The -- I was in the student unit  and there were two Orthodox Jewish student -- social work students  and one was ta king off all the holidays  and she was kind of punished for that  she eventually had to leave.
>> Agi Geva: Some of the Germans decided to liquidate the camp because of being afraid that the Russians might do it before.
What I did not know  until many months later  that General Eisenhower had issued orders that the pass system  the restriction on Jews  DP's  leaving the camp would cease immediately.
And did you say you you moved ca from one camp to another within Persia?
Now  in all the work like  for instance  in the workshops where I was there was only one SS man in charge of the carpentry and one SS man of the whole workshops  all the workshops.
And I doubt if Hitler was ever in a concentration camp.
They had a little tent on the side of the camp where they sent the very sick people there  and they were just laying there and dying.
And while we went to work and found a piece of wood or something  we picked it up and took it home and that's how we cooked our stuff.
Again  a man of both action and cerebral work  if you want.
04:16:25 Well  see  everybody -- somebody met somebody from each group for them to work  one person to two people  they know it.
Okay  so heres another question  when those Lithuanians came  and I said  well what did they say  and you you said  well  that Germanys taken over  Im going after more of  lets say their experiences  their details  where they were  did they have discrimination in work  did they ha were they On what time?
And uh  so we were also digging up unexploded bombs which  and  and this I did tw ice during my concentration camp career  uh  which was very dangerous of course and the German guard would stay pretty far away in case something exploded.
And then that morni ng my uncle was arrested and sent to -- Ben Bruner  that was my uncle  he was arrested and sent to a concentration camp.
I didn't see any council  but the Jewish police  I mean  this is the organized transport as I said  and groups of young boys to go to work that required to do some work for whatever the Germans wanted us to do.
Because there was a huge wall around  and you know how much work it has to do to paint that  too.
Where...where I had to work  and I could be more often with my...with the family.
Two-thirds of the people down to Krakow Plaszow  I remained with the people in theŠin my work concentration camp and continued to work at the factory.
Meanwhile  we had -- when I was assigned to the 16th armored division at Camp Chaffee  Arkans as  that was a brand new division  and I was a cavalry officer  in other words I -- we were training people for that division.
>> Henry Greenbaum: Well  they wouldn't let anybody go to work.
And it was a camp to show off how the Germans treat Polish officers.
He needs me because you know  I work with him  and I take care of money.
When I came to camp I had the  th e name of a woman who helped me to get into a good block.
But these police was very instrumental in in many cases  in many after we were already established in the ghetto  we had a most of the people had already a regular I mean  some regular job  work  you know  the job was because nobody paid for the job.
And I applied the commission  I wrote an essay  my experience in camp  and after several years it was accepted.
The minute they asked for volunteers to come to us  to volunteer to come to our to my camp.
Not exactly  not -- not exactly free and go  we had to have a little thing to go out from the camp to stroll around.
And she did get out of bed  and she we nt back to work in the hospital wher e she had started before she decided that life is not worth an ything.
15 On August 6  1942  Korczak  the orphanage staff  and some 200 children were sent to Treblinka concentration camp in Poland.
You had mi where was this Well  they were they all wanted to get out of it  out of the camp as quickly as they could  yeah.
So  when I got to the DP camp in Augsbur g  at the time when the population of the camp had to be registered  most had lost their i.d.
14 R.L.: Renata meant to say ﬁOr thankful to God.ﬂ Renata Laqueur 10 February 7  1998 You mean the concentration camp?
You kno w to – to get a sample  each rail road car had to be in the right – right assemble in the front of the car; and then they were marching them off right t o the camp through the gates.
Did -- did you ever feel that you have sort of North American pe rspectives in -- in your work?
We segregated the camp by nationality  and got all of the various nations nations living together rather than.... The Poles hated the Russians  and so they were locked up separately.
And the I had uh ...still I have contacts with the main...with the main camp; and uh  I was inquiring why  what happe ned.
Interview with Felix Nicinski March 6  2007 66 The voyage was very nice  it was very good  and we arrived in Australia  you know  in that -- they put us in the camp for a little while.
The sick ones were taken to other sanatariums and first they gave us three changes of clothing including work clothing.
So in 1980s  when there started to be a lot of information on TV about the Holocaust  my sister  Bertle  said  oh  I've got letters from mother when she was in the camp.
Some of the things that even transpired within the camp  because under certain conditions  certain supplies and things were brought in by the people that lived in the town of Dachau  so they also saw the buildings.
This guy  who was a nice guy  French Jewish guy  but he didnt work.
So there we were  in our third one which was the [Indiscernible] camp  very close to Austria.
So anyway  to make a long story short  Father couldnt get work in Vilnius.
Yes  this Bible was  uh  sent back after my brother-in-law was executed in the Sachsenhausen camp.
And did you meet any friends while you were at this camp?
In 1941  Manya was forced to work for a German company that produced military uniforms.
After six weeks of work and hard labor...oh yes...I'm I'm forgetting something...when we first came to Flossenburg  we were marched by this young SS guards with their dogs up the hill to the camp  we we were brought before a very large building in a kind of assembly area  and we were...there were four hundred and fifty of us approximatel y  and we were all told to undress  to leave our clothing on the floor and all our possessions and we go in to take showers.
We  and  we from there  we went to uh  Furcht  we were in a concentration camp in Holland 3 months  and uh  I was also very lucky  there comes a man to me  and he say  \ Are you not the daughter from the ho-from the Wei nberg-from the hotel in Zuola  and I say  \ yes.\
There were people wearing black triangles  which was uh  uh  uh people who committed uh  committed uh  uh  uh...were  who didn't want  really did uh refused to work for German um  eh industry  for German war industry.
The guy which I left calls up my mother  and he says  How come your son didn't come to work?
They used to be they're gassing I think at the beginning where they just took you to work and they gas you there because we knew and we saw those gassing chambers but not people.
Tho -- this is just a casual snapshot  sitting on the lawn at the camp in one of those Adirondack chairs.
