My mothers brother and his wife  they were hiding someplace else.
So he wanted to be able to use the hiding place for himself  if necessary  so he asked us to leave.
When the ghetto was already closed was there a possibility  were there some individuals that could get away?
Unfortunately  and that's part of the Holocaust history in Hungary  that not only the government collaborated but there was a very deeply fast  his toric  anti -Jewish sentiment in Hungary so when the Germans moved in with only 600 people  Eichmann was able to run up hundreds of thousands of Jews because the neighbors were reporting them  where they were hiding  where they were staying.
And the bad part of this was you know sometimes people went to the assembly and then they were hijacking you know some of the people you know  getting them away and hiding them behind rows of other people.
In 1945  '44  while hiding in a bunker in the destroyed Warsaw  I described my sufferings in Treblinka in a notebook.
My mother taught me years ago  long before I went into hiding  that crossword puzzles are a good thing  its part of my literacy situation.
And suddenly we hear some footsteps on top of that hiding place  with do gs.
I don't know if it was a month or two after we went into hiding.
If you could go in hiding  before you ended up in any of the lists  That was fine.
What about your sister  and when you came out of hiding  how would she resume her education?
So you had a lot of the Gentiles  who were  quote  hiding  th -- i -- were not legitimate -- were -- were hiding at home  so when I went there  they were afraid they would come for him and find me  or th eyd come for -- for me  and f-f -- and -- and you know  find him  so I stayed there  and then -- Were they in Lie-Liege?
And I continued and then I got the letter from my family that they were in hiding because they had heard about--no-- they've come to be notified that we have to report and that's when the father said he wasn't going and he hid on the other side of the city.
A soldier stopped me and he says  \ What are you hiding?\
So  the only people that knew that we are hiding there were the Polish family  and two priests from a nearby church.
The Nazis  however  who were never book worms  never learne d...uh...to learn to look..to look for things (laughter)  you know  in those little hollow hiding places.
Are there any sights or sounds or smells that bring back memories of the war time?
So  the whole thing was a stage  a plot from the Germans who knew that some Jews were hiding and they paying for the safety to Polish people  but some running out of money so they had to sooner or later get out.
You must have fantasized about food or talked about it  and then you could finally eat more freely  and you were n't hungry?
Oh  an s-second cousin came by  and that was -- and I had one second cousin girl that she -- she was in hiding too  and she worked in a nursing home  and we went there sometimes and she came over my house to meet her boyfriend who wa s in hiding too.
Nothing was really down other than one portion was hit and there were some other buildings that were attached to our house and we checked that and I remember my brother said well  there's not much damage to our hiding place.
So  I went upstair s  we put her in the hiding place  and thank God they didn't stay too long  and they didn't search the whole house.
Uh we didn't know these people  but you know  they were...other people were hiding them.
So  we thought  in case we would have to go and hide  we will have some things there.
And these children were crying  screaming for their parents  crying for their mothers. \
I jump in this little room  and I see a young man is making a hiding place under a pile of coal.
Maybe they were not anti -Semitic but they were afraid of the dangers of hiding Jewish children so they sent us right back to our parents.
So what was the relationship like between your family and your hiding family?
So did you know the people -- there were some people who were already hiding.
So the following day  I immediately walked around the streets  where most of the people -- who had everything they needed for the first three  four weeks -- they're hiding  in order not to be captured to be taken to work.
And as he talked to me  I was coming out from my hiding place and I could smell the vodka on him.
And he would do all the shopping for us; and  and this was our hiding place  and we  were hiding in Horinc was the name where we  were hiding after  after my mother was out from  from the prison  after the six months were gone.
And they came  the German Gestapo  and the -- came to arrest him  not because he was hiding Jews  be-- but because he was a member  an active member  of the AK  the Armia Krajowa  the Polish underground.
No  I did not take identity papers of the Pagrachs when I went into hiding.
If I asked Wisia  sh e would say I think your mother's working in a different town  or the Germans are looking fo r people  and she was hiding  or whatever.
This photo was taken while Al was in hiding in Tole's home.
at about the same time did your parents go into hiding?
When we were first liberated and after my brother  my sister and I came  we stayed in their little apartment where they had been hiding.
A few people came out of hiding and the Pols killed them.
They came out from the woods  the partisans  a lot of them they came out and also from hiding.
Yeah  and a -- a -- yeah  we -- we were not hiding anything  there was no way of hiding it.
She said this is going to be the end of the tape  so would you talk about hiding when everybody left on the death march.
They ma y have been praying privately  but you couldnt say anything about being Jewish  anything that would just even gi ve the slightest suspicion even to the people you were hiding  you know.
You know  you made a little bit too much noise because we were hiding.
I want you to tell the story of how you ended up working for the factory owner  and giving a manicure to the SS.
>>Rae Goldfarb: But what happened simply was that the villagers at that point  they were just as scared as we were  and Mother was hiding and some of the villagers did not really know her and she had changed tremendously.
Bill Benson: This is incredible  though  that he built a hiding place for you inside the lumber factory where he was doing forced labor.
They were shooting in the walls because a lot of Jews had double walls  they were hiding in the walls.
That following night  Abram heard in his hiding place that  th at farmers house was ransacked an d he was sure th at we got caught and killed.
But the rest of the town was hiding behind the curtain.
Now tell me about the day when -- when they came and found you where you were in hiding.
Again  first thing they started doing was looking for hiding places because we already knew that the next thing is going to be  again  they'll nee d to take us out again.
The house faced a small forest  a young forest  and evidently some of the soldiers who ran away  they were hiding.
And we did hide in our -- and rarely you find a place to hide  until well -- the thi ngs what we heard whats going on [indecipherable] in the ghetto.
Uh what happened...I think in 1944...uh the hiding mother's youngest sister was pregnant and she needed some help and she asked me or my mother or somebody if I could help her.
Now  before that  while you were still in school  you went to a public school?
There were two others who hid in the house where they took all of the children.
And for three days I ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 14 didn't see nobody.
And they got in the pile of hay  they were hiding in the hay  and the soldiers then come around  took him out of the hay  and s hot him.
I say we are resistance  and they say this by resistance we define the people in the forests of Vilna  or the people who  in the Warsaw uprising  and I certainly agree that they were resistance  and I would define it by saying they were resistance of desperation  because if you are in their situation in the Warsaw ghetto  if you are in their situation hiding in the forests and trying to to do damage to the enemy  y-yyou you ar this is a a desperation move.
And it was it so that when you and your mother were arrested  that it was at that point that your father and brother we nt into hiding with your nanny?
And the Germans came running to the concentrat ion camp  theyre hiding themself.
A. Yes  that was the reason why our grandpare nts left their home of the Slovak side and joined us in hiding because of the fear that the nazis  the Slovak n azis will put two and two together that we must have obt ained help from the Slovak side and the logic would have pointed towards our grandparents that they must have engineered our escape.
We just do not go to -- we dont belong to a synagogue  but our grandson -- our son was never Bar Mitzvahed  our grandson was  this past -- this past April  and as a present  we took him to Holland and we s howed him where we both lived  where my husband lived and where I lived and where I was in hiding and he met -- End of Tape Two  Side B USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0024 54 Beginning Tape Three  Side A This is a continuation of a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Susie Schwarz.
He wasŠwhen we lived in the little house  he was hidden.
And besides uh Russian planes were coming and bombing the highways  so we went off the road and uh we were hiding somewhere  you know  in the grass and I remember  at one time they said these troops  the Hungarian troops...they stopped on the highway and the Hungarian...some of the soldiers were coming towards us because we were near a little lake or something  and they were coming closer and closer.
And from that day on  I was goi ng out every day  looking for Jews that came out from hiding.
I was very conscious to be Jewish  and I never -- you know  never hiding this.
He knew the hiding place of every...of a lot of people.
And at that point  we had hidden all our documents in the house where I originally ended up  in the attic.
Is this still in Lodz   are you And that was still in Lodz  yes  and we couldnt get in touch with my brother  but people who I dont know what they were not sick  or they were hiding  used to com communicate  go places.
Hiding us out up in the attic  knowing who we were  Madame Bergot  lovely lady  non Jewish  had a tragedy of her own when she was 21  lost her husband in the third (?)
The farm was  let's say like this...uh longer and then...and around this two rows of high woods  trees  and between the trees very close was a canal  so I went out from this hiding place and I laid down in the canal at night and I fell asleep.
And the person was a Russian officer who escape d from  a few POW's were in this village with the Germans and he managed to escape  they were kept in a barn and he was hiding  so I noticed him and I was very happy because you have somebody to  of course it was dangerous  but the Germans were down in the village  I says  uphill.
I wa s hiding in one of the rooms there which you didn't know about.
So I was supposed to get out my door and go into the little shed where you keep wood  that's where my hiding place was.
And they arrested my fath er  and they arrested Mr. Kahn  and my mother and I  we -- its a long story  really  but she was hiding in a closet  and they -- they opened up every closet in the house and finally they -- to make a very long story short  theres much more to it  but during th e night  I put up a ladder against the house and ma -- got my mother out of the window  a nd then we went into a haystack  and then after that  there was a young girl -- this was way past midnight -- a young girl of the Dutch -- of the Dutch underground  sh-she prob ably was no more than 16 or 17 years old  came on a bicycle to tell us that the -- th-the Germans were aware that they were -- that they had missed two more Jews  thats my mother and I  and Mrs. Kahn for that matter  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0055 8 and so they were on their way back.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0050 4 Well  during that time  how much information could you get when you were -- when you were in hiding?
Well  I knew that that was not the right answer  and I knew that I had to escape now  cause I knew that if this man would take a take me back to where we are hiding  you know  he would betray us.
In Poland you must have heard about many peop le who kept Jewish people hiding.
>> Bill Benson: And as you said  your mom then made the decision to put you into hiding.
I don't want anybody to come in to th at  in to that uh hiding place from our neighbors.
Had there been children in hiding who people wanted to keep?
Now  were the people who were hiding you always receiving some kind of money or compensation?
In the meantime  the Vichy government...uh...persecute...started to persecute the foreigners and to persecute especially the foreign Jews and we had to live...uh...not...uh...yet in hiding  but on the edge of society.
There -- I guess there was never any thought that you would go into hiding  since you had a chance to get out.
They never gave the names  but I know  because I worked with them that they were hiding Jews making false papers for them  i.d.
And they were hiding us until we decided that the best way to hide will be in our back yard where we had a barn.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 14 >> Josie Traum: Yes.
After the hiding period  I joined after the -- When we could no longer hide at that place   mother sent one of her friends from Krakow to get me.
CE: The man  the -- what -- were hiding  the brother what brought us and the brother we were hiding  they live in a -- lived any more  but we -- financially we send them a few times a year  some money  whatever we can.
And then he brought us into a place and we had a very good hiding place there.
Do -- do you remember any other instance before you go into hiding where somebody calls you a dirty Jew  or uses an epithet  or -- or is that the one incident that you recol -- No  its really the one incident that I do remember.
I married and I had a...you know  in Latvia  I already have Grundschule [elementary school]  I finished before my hiding  six...six classes.
So I and my sister were sitting eight days and eight nights behind this little wall  covered with black material  a pail of water and a bread  and we were si tting and hiding the childrens and we got our childrens.
Q. So there was some sort of communication information being passed between all of you in hiding?
They found a nice  warm hiding places in the office  the bureaucracy of the military  of the navy  or everything else.
Soon after  your mother  your sisters  and you went into hiding.
So the outlook for successful hiding was ne-never -- not too good.
And that  to make a hiding place to be was impossible.
That started the period of putting people into hiding and we  from periodically  got one hiding person or another  one fugitive or another.
In 1943  the family went into hiding in a bunker in the ghetto.
But anyhow  what happened during th ese two years  my mom  of course my father was in a forest  hiding there.
They knew that people were hiding and they coming back to the house.
They thought ah-ha  there is a uh Fifth Column person tryi ng to find Jews  and they act ually went in hiding for the duration of his stay.
We thought of going into hiding  definitely because my father was t hat type.
But I was a tough kid and I -- I was not running away  I was not hiding.
But its plausible that the model for that Is the not hiding  because it because in the garden it was because it was beneath them.
There were several underground organizations  so Jews and non -Jews that helped Jews to find hiding places  especially for children.
And she would  she would put a pot of hot water what the landlady should think that she is cooking  in order not to let her know our dire need and in what bad circumstances we are  because this landlady didn't know that we have no papers a nd that we are just in hiding.
In 1943  Albert's father was deported to a forced labor camp  and Albert's mother and the children wen t into hiding with Madame Galop and her husband for the next six months.
It was a basement and she was hiding in the basement  in Millers basement.
So but they had my name  so thats where I went war in hiding and so on.
So what we started doing is make hiding places; wuntas as we called.
No  there was more people that I had to contact but I didn't know--we had sometimes English flyers who were shot down and hey were arrested and we had sometimes in the seminary hiding  and then we had also one of our seminarians was very good in astronomy.
Some  in the last year what I know  they used to make hiding places in the houses  like next to walls.
And where were you -- were you hiding in the house  I mean  what was the -- Well  we were in the house  you know  they -- they -- they were actually picking up people from the street -- 27 Street. --
We were in   we had to leave there and hide.
It meant that every Jew in hiding had a window of opportunity of 365 days  with an automatic renewal  because if anybody had asked will you take Leonard Vis in  from August 42 til May 45  you would have had a resounding no.
This is tape one  side A. Mr. Lessing  were just going to go on and recap some of your experiences during the war  and if you want to just start talking about -- I di -- basically from the beginning of the German occ -- occupation in the Netherlands  when you went into hiding  and the [indecipherable] a short description of that time  and then well go into the postwar experiences.
The hiding place dated back long before the first World War  w hen the local people were sometimes using it to get protection during the times of pogroms.
That they didn't know any more about a concentration camp than we did.
And you -- you had to tell them that you are Jewish?
We're rolling again  so why don't you talk a little bit about  if you want  either  the not harming anybody or the helping people hiding in the woods.
ROUGH DRA FT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 13 >> Bill Benson: Over the next 10 months after your birth  Al  leading up until September 1942  conditions just became so much worse.
Somehow or other  I don't recall how  they found out that I was Jewish.
I know that that we were not as tense in that family as in the previous family because there was a little bit more room and a little bit more uh...there were more people so we had uh but the woman we were hiding with  Mrs.   was also extremely anxious.
But he describes how they went into the houses and they are going underground  there were sewers and the Jews were hiding th ere and they finished them all.
And we had a place where we had...where we had a little workshop for... for carpentry... carpentry workshop with machines there and we had a little dormitory there so some of these boys were hiding there  because nobody knew.
And there could have been some relationship there which he was obviously hiding from my mother.
Because there was known that in the province Overeisel there were children who had been bought for hiding so the story goes light haired children above the rivers which wasnt true of you at all.
On one side the men had the toilets and we had primitive toilets.
But I saw other children taking a pear or two hiding behind the clothes and I said I would like to bring back to the camp for my sister.
Nathan: No  when I was still in the- Anthony: In the attic  hiding.
It was my son who took over to represent most of the associated plaintiffs in the case of Paul Touvier  but I remember it was about 20 years ago  he was still hiding with a group of (???)
In every ghetto that we lived everybody called it a maline  a hiding place.
She did  on arrival in Auschwitz they -- they -- they both  I think  were very much aware of -- of what the realities of Auschwitz were  there was no -- no hiding it.
So at night when we came to be counted for  what we did...we took instead of the children  of instead of that particular child that they had consented to go in hiding  we we had a little blanket  blanket with a little piece of rag in there or a doll or whatever looked like a  a child.
And when the Russians  at whom we shoot  found themselves a piece of a forest and were hiding  so we gave a commander to to to shot better.
Like I -- I dont know  Hedy said there was a hiding place underneath the -- the window where they displayed the bottles of gin  and whatever.
A lot of people went into the basements and hid that way.
So some people went into the Resistance  some people trie d to go into hiding  some people went to their nation of origin  trying to like -- like some of the Romanian went to th e Romanian embassy and were trying to go back to Romania because -- we -- we were receiving letters from Romania.
He took me to that cemetery  because it's very close to our home  and he showed me the little chapel where I was hiding.
We were very -- were in danger -- my sister  I remember we would look out -- there were different hiding places on the -- in the stable.
At that point t here was no place to hide anymore.
Some of them hiding in farms  some of them living in the woods.
Whatever our possessions ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 29 were were under the bunk.
>> Bill Benson: Briefly  what was that like to go back?
Yeah  I dont know if they knew  because the allies  this was later on  you know what I mean  when the Russian reached there  to the Auschwitz and before  you had USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0080 91-- most of the camps were in the Polish -- in the pa -- in po -- in the Polish territory.
And Did you while you were in hiding  did you still get your period?
An d from the air made a mistake and they dropped several bombs and one of them landed very near of my house where family of 11 people  escapees from Warsaw were hiding in.
Im -- in fact I remember he told me that around September  he finally  in the last place where he was hiding in one of the subur bs of Athens  he got up  and he knew it was Yom Kippur  and he begun to pray.
The Gestapo was interrogating and trying to get names  you know where they can pick up some other Jews  some other young men who were hiding because everybody was already hiding that way that time because the transport was...were always finished.
And I - I dont like the idea of -- of saying it was a -- it was a ghetto  it was not a ghetto.
Now they started to put the triangle retroactive  but I was hiding.
>> Bill Benson: Marty  who else from your family was selected for work?
We call at Christmas  and we call at birthday  to the er -- just the oldest ddaughter  not all -- not all seven of them  but one or two are -- have -- one -- one of the sons is very angry with us  because they thou ght that my mother wa s very rich  that she had a lot of money  and that she didnt give enough money for our hiding to her parents.
So I -- I -- At the time when I was in hiding  I think about [indecipherable] of God.
Did you tell your children about your experiences during the war.
9 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD >> Bill Benson: Over the next 10 months  after your birth  by September 1942  conditions had grown so far worse  so much more worse in Holland  and that was a time when your parents began to think about taking more dramatic steps of going into hiding.
It -- it -- I'll be always sorry and I'm never really happy with it because I wrote -- I wanted it like a three  four hundred page book and it would have been  because I have written everything much more  you know  I-I wrote a lot about -- about -- how -- how -- about my life  how I felt  about -- about everything and -- and then somebody read it an-and advised me that I should not -- I should just write it to this -- to this period  you know  finish it at the period th-that I did  no-not to write the rest of my life  because -- and also I wrote with a lot of -- more emotion because I-I used to  you know  always -- like when somebody dreams o-of  o-or imagines th-the -- whatever  you know  about the life -- about what -- what kind of a life they're going to have as -- with their Prince Charming  I was always  in my mind  thinking only about -- about everything I will do for my mother and -- and how I'm going to make -- make her happy someday and -- and how she's not going to have to suffer so much because -- because well  we were in hiding.
So app...usually an escapee would have to know  uh  have to  uh  get the hiding somewhere in the building in that area outside of the 8 camp  and then wait for a night to come.
They were either prisoners or they were in hiding or they were in the Resistance in th e fields somewhere outside of Paris.
And after my accident -- I had an accident before we went into hiding.
And when he returned from the outsi de  he knew that something has to be done and started to organize the men in the compound to build bunkers  hiding places.
Worn by Leo  as required by French and German authorities  until he began hiding under his false identity. (
So maybe because of that  but they were such a -- so anti-Semitic  they were worse than the Germans.
And every person was hiding deep  you know  in the cellars and other  other places because we didn't know what to do.
And they had like a general store which was just across the house where we were in hiding.
The Dutch police came with two guys from the Sicherheitsdienst  and they found the hiding place that we had.
But  there was  at the time of the Russians  this Pole himself  was hiding  because he was a rich farmer.
That's when my two sisters were taken to the psychiatric hospital where both my parents at that point were hiding  my mother a nurse  my father as a patient  and there was a mini reunion of the family then.
So how long did you stay in hiding in -- in Nice  you think?
Now he got the message and we got the food  but this was the  uh  I was a  I was a second lieutenant then promoted to first lieutenant  but you know I  I had had my fill of all these uh  so-called lieutenant colonels and colonels uh  who uh  really  hiding behind rules and so on  and uh I had other experiences.
And everybody had problems after the Jews came back from either hiding or from the camps  and everyone was trying to put their life together.
You should be too much with the hiding because the army is going there.
Now  at this time  Peppy is hiding that he s Jewish  youre not hiding that youre Jewish?
And with a little child  would have been really impossible to go into hiding.
And were they -- the people hiding you  were they all non-Jewish?
So his answer was this place is not for hiding Jews. {
And the way he went to Swiss over mountains and hiding in the woods and this and that  no.
So you actually did get to have some fa mily life  even when you were in hiding?
>> Bill Benson: Has your mother -- did she ever tell you what it was like for her when she made that decision to put you into hiding  knowing -- not knowing where she would ever -- whether she would ever see you again?
And the whole village -- later on you'll see where we were in hiding  the whole village  maybe the Mendels famil y will commit suicide.
I also know that about...uh...remember a lady  Mrs. Shefner  used to tell me she used to be in hiding in a...in a place where there were chickens.
And its not because of I because I was hiding  because I wasnt.
And the Jewish police they took them to the ninth fort and they de- manded of them to disclose where there were hiding places for children.
So he gave my father a temporary exemption and on the strength of this  we all came out of our hiding and went back to our apartment.
But  for instance  there were two teenagers hiding in a -- in a attic  and what could I do?
So she is somewhere  and my sister and I with the rest of my aunt's family are hiding there  plus a number of neighbors that came into hide in the brick house.
Then when your parents put you into hiding  was it that time that you were adopted by another family ?
The police warned my father's generation to go into hiding for a couple of days because they had instructions to run them out.
Now my fiance and his family did go into hiding and they hid also a lot of other families and the rabbi with his family  because my father-in-law was very wealthy and he gave a lot of money for the people  you know  that -- that hid him.
Your mother has taken you to sneak into the ghetto and now you've gotten out of it.
To see people who were hiding from our to wn  who came there from our town.
Actuall y  of what I heard mother say later was that they did have a hiding place for them  but my grandfat her coughed  so he said he didn't want to go because he will cough and they'll find him  find the hiding place  so my grandmother said well she's not going to go if he's not going  and my two uncle s  my aunt  and my other grandmother weren't going to go into the hiding place on their own  not knowing what was waiting for them in Treblinka.
I remember once he had been hiding for a few days.
And she had goiter  and one of the doctors that was his specialty wanted to do experiments on her and the girls were hiding her.
They beat up the fellow that was hiding my brother very badly.
SSometimes I -- when I heard the -- the footsteps and I knew that they are Germans  I -- I grab my brother and I put him to a suit case that -- I push -- close the suitcase and I push under the -- th-the bed  and I by myself was hiding in the corner of the room behind my mother robe -- a night robe that was ha-ha -- it -- it -- he -- he was til the floor  I knew that I can maybe hide there -- there  but I made sure that my feet will be back  that the German couldnt see maybe in my -- my feet standing out from the end of the -- of -- of the robe.
pause) He  he thought it is so important to  to have it not only to have written the diary and to put it into say into the earth  into the hiding but also maybe when the nobody will be left from us and so he went to a priest  so I a high priest he knew and he brought him the plan how they crates were here  where the crates were and he gave it to him.
>> Bill Benson: And now you and your mother are hidden there as well.
And there were other people in the house that were hiding  so it was not anything alien in any way.
>> Bill Benson: Of course  in 1942  the Germans began rounding up Jews in Brussels and in Belgium and that's when your parents decided it was time to no longer live anonymously but go into hiding.
And I was hiding for a while because I could not stand  but thank heaven it healed.
I went down there and if you want it I'll describe this the  the hiding place.
The idea was to run into that particular hiding place and see what else would happen  whether we could get out or not.
One by one they were killed in Polish forests where they were in hiding.
And so she said to me  look  we have in our camp two Russian prisoners who who fled  and who are hiding in our in this in this camp.
And we have this little hiding place  so me and my family are going in there.\
And the little reporter  he didn't want to wr ite it because you're accusing the government of hiding things or stealing th ings.
And they suspected the neighborssomethingI don't know  because they used to feed us  they bring food to th e + the cows be there and So you were in theirwhere were you hiding at their home?
So however  the other part in hiding was  still in Lostravmozavetsky  where I and a cousin of mine  in a few months  almost two months later  make a chance and cross the border with the horse and wagon  dressed as farmers and we make an attempt  the Germans almost caught up with us and we salvaged some merchandise from there  from the hiding place  which it gave us an ability with  moneywise  to have for the first winter that we were over there.
In regard to Kriska   you -- who had seen you in the barn  Dad explained to her  if I remember correctly  that you were one of the partisans  who was hiding there.
At least she had her family and so they were in hiding and however horrible that was  at least they had each other for a long time.
At what...if you had to think about this  what do you think got you through this five years of hiding often by yourself  what gave you the strength  the courage?
So eventually we went to a place where other family members were hiding and we asked to join them basically and the farmer accepted us.
So we went into...one place the farmer didn't know that we were there  we hiding there.
33 -- place  so what -- I just lost my train of thought -- when you were there -- do you know approximately how long you were in hiding ther e  and would you sometimes leave from there and come back and go to different hiding places in between?
My father and my little brother were hiding outside of the ghetto.
HK: They  well  to my knowledge  a molina was a place of hiding.
I -- Well  actually  we matured -- we call it matured  when we went into hiding  and when I was a maid in -- in the Bastins house.
And told my aunt  \ Do not bring Lilly back to this address  because her mother and brother were just taken away.ﬂ And this is how I stayed with my aunt and my uncle  and in hiding in  out in the country.
And they were flying so low  the Germans  that were hidden in the basement and part of the basement was destroyed because Poland didnt have anything to defend.
You know  from one hiding place that had gotten dangerous to another one which is new  hopefully better.
I  for instance  were were hiding from the moment when I was told my brother-in-law was not a Zionist.
He had to hide himself  and he was hiding in one of the big bank's bank-vault  which was just a block away from where I kn ew it from this woman.
On the other hand  they couldn't go on the black market and buy food for -- I should tell you that after -- after a few months when we were hiding there  there were 13 of us  13 Jews.
Look: some had ghetto friends who told them they were hiding especially a lot of young good-looking ladies had no problem that were in hiding  a lot went in the woods  became partisans.
We were the submerged people  the underdikers   the people in hiding  and the the imagery that was used  ima...imagery that was used was of a submarine so the people who knew where you were were your periscope.
I had one more aunt that lived on in hiding in Belgium.
And they both had been in hiding during the war  right?
And I knew that he is there hiding already in the forest  so our plan was that on my father will come there  well stay for a few days there with this family  with a Christian family.
It was a brave decision  but it we ha d no choice  because if we went back  the Nazi would recognize us  would take us to where my father and mother and the other people were hiding.
My father  before we went into hiding  used to get on his bicycle and go and get  you know  the carp is not the same as th e American carp.
So we  you know  hid during the day  traveled at night.
Did you  as a child  did you know that you we re Jewish?
They put a lot of stuff there for hiding for him   my tables  cabinets  furniture  drapes  every thing of my mother's.
I -- Boredom was -- I would almost say secondary [indecipherable] you know  it was -- it wa s really the fear that any of us would do the wrong thing  and then it would leak out that we were hiding there  and then we would be sh -- sent to the camps  and al -- an d of course  my hiding father would be also picked up and sent to the concentration camps.
My wife went from the hiding twice back to the neighborhood but she didnt go into the ghetto because otherwise she wouldnt be able to get out.
When um I came out of the hospital  I had an aunt who was hiding out in the country.
So  I was proud of that and later on when I had to go into hiding in the north  I had to abandon all that work I did in the south  I told the director of the seminary  I said I have to confess something.
And then visiting his sister with seven children hiding in a little place.
And one by one  I got closer and closer to finding out where she actually was living sort of hiding in the open  in a way.
So  but under the haystack was the variation that was the worst night I think I ever spent in hiding.
Apparently  as we moved on through Germany  these people were uh  were uh  carried back behind the German lines and as a consequence  only those that may have hidden someplace uh  uh  were the ones that we saw.
So my father di dnt go in his hiding place  he hadnt heard it either  and just then my mo-mother opened the door and there was a Latvian policeman and he said  I am looking for Adolf -- Adolf Alperovich  your husband.
And this is when -- his birthday  Ignatzs birthday  May 19  thats -- at that time you were all in hiding together?
Even though I was going...I was just about sixteen when we went into hiding  you know  we're not the child ren of today.
I mean  there was no -- no way of -- of hiding it  but as far as the owners  I have no idea  no idea.
Any person hiding  harboring or abetting  or 62 facilitating a Jew is punishable by death.
But they would have found us there  that's no hiding place.
They just came  they were just new-coming from they were [indecipherable] in a in a place hid hide hiding.
We went into hiding I think the end of 41  beginning of 42  and I would see my parents  I would come to see them  they woul d come to see me.
I mean  I was just curious whether -- People hunting for him and people hiding him.
From there we continued on at night  hiding in the fields or the forest  until we reached another family that was halfway between my hometown of Dokszyce and Glebokie which was a larger ghetto.
We closed the the the hiding place  so she got killed from the from the from the Germans.
All the people we had contact with after the war were people who were -- either had survived the concentration camps or people who had been in hiding  so that was normal conversation.
It was very difficult and especially for the hiding mother because she had her own children and us and it was horrendous and they were all growing people  you know...they were all  like I said  from two to eighteen and I was like thirteen  fourteen.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0024 9 Now  moving along  what I was intere sted in knowing how you -- how your father arranged the hiding places and whether his ability to reward somebody financially had any role in that.
I took and I had a jeep  put her in the jeep  and I went back to the place where we were in hiding.
So I was even hiding in the attics  in the cellars  just not to be su rprised during the night when they come and take you away.
She hide it in...also in the cellar and until we found a a better hiding in the cellar somewhere you see  and until we escaped we...I had to escape from Kovno because all the time they used to question me  where's the diary.
There was a father and 3 daughters that were in hiding  and other people came  coming out like from th e woods or from the partisans  and I have to back up because there was a group of people in hiding during the occupation about 20 people that were hiding in a woman's basement  and the local a-army  the Polish Underground  knew about them  and they came to kill them off.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 30 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: there I mean--there you didn't have anything.
When we returned back from hiding -- And when did hiding end and how did it end for you?
You in this area Š wherever we were   there in the ghetto Št here was a ghetto.
My Aunt was terrified  she said  \ Must be terrible if your father let you go \  and \ you can't stay here  not even for any time \  because her sons were being looked for  they were suppose to go to labor camp and they were hiding so they didn't need more people hiding there from things  so she dispatched one of her sons that was safer for him to go to the train station  that he should be the one to accompany us to Budapest.
We lived with a little group of o-other Dutch kibbutznikim  some of who had also gone through hiding  and we worked hard  we got children  and we didnt talk about the war  talked about everything but the war.
This Dr. Behnker who came to the ghetto and he came to the Jewish committee and said all books should be...and we should write announcement all over th e ghetto that they should bring in certain places  concentrate...conc entration places to bring the books to be delivered to the to the Germans  and all the wagons of the ghetto were mobilized to bring the books from the various parts of the ghetto to the to be handed over to the Germans  so in the underground    we decided the very...mo st valuable books we want to to to rescue  so we mobilized the teachers whic h will accompany the wagons and take out from the wagons valuable books that they consid er of historic value and put it in a separate wagon which was accompanied and th ey would...little children...the..you know  the   the messengers  so they were not... and you see  and they...and this the wagon where they stood  took these wagons and they used to send it to...bring it to some hiding place for us.
And then the last year  before the Nazis came in  she didnt let me go to hiding and she said  ﬁYou are our child  no matter what.
We landed in Trinidad in December of 38 so we left almost immediately and we were on this train and this man was sitting next to us  apparently wanted to talk and he wanted to ask my Interview with Erica Laufer 17 August 19  2012 father how much money was he hiding in his suitcase.
So this period when you were in hiding la sted until when?
There are people  many people who were alive hiding inside per- ished in the fire.
Do you want to move on to your escape from this ghetto.
They thought the Jews were hiding things in the backyards and in the walls  you know  under the streets  and so they were digging everything to look at  they could find something.
And in many cases  ours like hiding in the forest  hiding and hiding was much worse than...than...than a camp  than a concentration camp.
5 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD >> Bill Benson: And where you lived?
There were hiding places under the houses yes and many people survived in those hiding places.
In this hold  she had -- thats was the grandmother  her granddaughter  her son and her sons wife was down there  plus other people in this hiding place.
In this area is where you spent your war years hiding with a false identity Thats true.
Then all the leaders disappeared from us and then the owner of the house sent down his chauffeur and when they came and they sele cted us who was all that they put in a separate room and they was hiding including me.
12 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD >> Jacques Fein: I would say after the war  those who survived and those who were put in hiding  I was put in hiding by the OSE organization  their job during the war was to save the kids.
I cannot gi ve you an answer on the question of G-d because I will as long as I live ask where he was hiding when they burned 24 000 people a day in Auschwitz and we  the few survivors  had to live wi th the stench of 24 000 people burning a day.
You want it ﬂ -- somehow another  I guess he -- he said where were you  and I said I was in Holland  in hiding.
So all of that had to be done in hiding  which it was .
In that same way  in our village  a gentleman was taken and all the Jews he was hiding in his house and we never saw any of them again.
Somehow we made each -- h-he made us understand that he w -- that hes hiding from the -- from the police  and the -- as they ca me through we made like he was one of us so he wouldnt be bothered  yeah  so I remember that  yeah.
I was...I guess I was talking about that uh...t he year in the Jewish school was kind of a wonderful year with uh...but at the end of that school year people kind of disappeared and we didn't know where they went  if they were picked up or if they were fleeing to uh Belgium  France  wherever to...or if they went into hiding.
In the very same token  we helped Jews that were hiding in the woods b ecause there were Jewish  young children and also elderly people  women that escaped  wanting a fam ily that ran out of a ghetto that either burning or everybody was being killed  and quite a few children.
Well  unfor -- unfortunately  month later -- by that time Im in the mountains  but Im -- I -- I learn after the war  some people  you know   foolishly  in March  or April 44 -- now  were going about a year later  the Jews issue another proclamation -- I mean  the Germans  saying Jews can come and register to get matzoh distributed  and some of them  believe it or not  did go  and they were grabbed  and -- Now  before you go to the mountains  you are hiding for about how long?
Everybody under fire is hiding because we don't know what they're going to do to us  but if you're Je ws  you can go back to the city  and we said if you're hiding  why would they be so good to us; we hiding with you.
And dote -- the German h ead as you know  a krippo [indecipherable] side  there they were calling Jewish and tried to get away -- all Jews had to work  the Jews were hiding  the Jews did all kind of things they wanted.
>> Al Munzer: Sadly  and tragically  the husband and wife of the family where my sisters were placed had a fight  and the husband denounced his wife to the Germans as hiding two Jewish children.
I'd like you to describe for me what it was like to live in hiding.
Then we had to go into hiding  and the fact ory closed because also the Germans took over.
Wherever they could find a Jew  they used to kill a Jew.
we succeeded in hiding our little boy my sister and me and took him in a rucksack.
I knew they had killed a pig and I went there and I said can you give me a piece too for the people who were hiding.
Apparently  the railway conductor's family and his family also knew about this hiding place.
Three nights I was sleeping under--three couples were in a room  and I was hiding at night under their bed.
Oh  that was months after  two months after I was hiding.
What did you do  how long di d it take for you to be deported  what happened?
So we were there --we were in that hiding place without every budging from that place for two full months.
So we hide -- we did hide in a house that was strange -- you know  we didnt know it  but -- and spend a couple days or more  waiting for some signal from God  or w ho knows who  what to do.
They had information that the deportations from these Jewish houses started in earnest  so they felt that people were much safer in this hiding place.
He took us to  not find  not being to able to find a new hiding place  he divided us up and took us to where my parents were and took his little girl to where he was hiding at.
And then they turned to this Catholic family and thats how we got the house where we went into hiding.
They are still looking for people for deportation because in this day  many were hiding with me  but we made it an organized form.
Do you reme mber being hungry while you were in hiding  or you had enough food?
They felt that what was being done to the Jews was wrong  and they gave us a hiding place.
That we changed the na mes because we were hiding out.
Why don't we start with the  why don't you descri be the hiding place in your house and how that got killed  and what it was like.
39 -- you know  you have been -- where youre found out in your hiding place  but Im -- I was just curious in general  is there anything else you remember as far as anything you havent already shared  what would be the biggest challenges of this life that you had in hiding?
My sister and I were young  and my father  who was this time in the late 50s was hiding when they were calling.
So  my father and my little brother  the youngest one  they were hiding in an attic somewhere with another few couples and after two nights I think  they ran away to the forest because the town was a lot of forest.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0030 8 But you were not in hiding at this time?
We left only because we heard that the Jews of Athens went into hiding  we didnt know why.
Did you know anyone who went into hiding or did you think about going into hiding?
I thought in that time that our hiding place was a good hiding place.
The idea was to hide and to try and see maybe we will survive by hiding.
>> Bill Benson: And you were hidden -- I mean  you were hidden in the home.
The brought in a special...uh... trained people  killers....special killers to find the find the people who were hiding.
And at that time  we really didn't know what Auschwitz was except that they were sending people there.
Anyway  he interviews me  and I tell him the story about the hiding in the woods  and the -- the raid  and I tell him about finding Oskam junior back  and about the terrible surprise  or the wonderful surprise  to find out that I didnt -- what say -- did do enough  that I helped those people -- to save seven people  to save their lives  and -- and -- and he makes a break  and they play some music  and then the program goes on  and at the end  he says  ﬁWell  thank you very much ﬂ and he -- ﬁIll show you where we have the telephone.ﬂ So we go back to a room  and they have a dozen telephones there  and they have six people.
Interview with Ninetta Feldman September 14  2010 21 the v not in such great detail  but that that that th-the Jews of Athens have gone into hiding  I remember that.
It was a small hiding  but we were all sitting in that hiding.
Because the Poles came  and they were 38 going hiding  and I worked for them.
But what we didnt realize is that there 23 were two people in the building who had reported what -- that my father was hiding in the apartment.
And then my mothers sister  who wa s rich  she came out of hiding with her husband  and so I had her.
It seems to have made a deep impression upon my parents  because at some point  they decided were not going to go on those trains  like most of the Jew -- Dutch Jews  and we were going to go into hiding  although we had no places prepared.
I -- there was no way I could go  for some -- I dont know what the reason it was  but I wasnt -- I didnt go into hiding and -- And the Germans came and physically dragged you out?
Now  as Bill mentioned  the Gestapo took Lucia away for questioning because a woman down the street had said that Lucia Nowicka  housekeeper for the Swierczyskis  was hiding Jewish children.
Was a lot of young people  particularly children had to be taken out of convents or hiding places  and was a big battle sometimes  you know  older sisters f -- survived. [
N o  he build that place of hiding only after they brought us into the ghetto.
I also remember sort of hiding it as much as I could.
After the liquidation  a lot of them came out  and a lot of them still were hiding.
>> Bill Benson: Al  as you told us earlier  before your mother found the hiding place for you  she had found a hiding place for Eva and Leana with a Cath olic family.
Two other children saved themselves by hiding in the house where the children were taken.
He would escape and then sneak into the basement hiding place?
And...uh...that af ter this became the activity when the Warsaw ghetto was liquidated....the activities of.. .uh...the underground was how to help people in hiding and how to help people in their...in concentration camps and contacts  and there was also a thought in those days si nce we know that they are Hungary...this was 1943...that Hungary Jews are free.
Somehow she was in another room   and she hid under the bed.
When you were -- when you were in the ghett o  and when you were hiding  did you think that you would get through it all?
Really  when I was put in hiding  when I was 3 years old  I didn't even know what a Jew was.
But those who were hiding  and were perhaps with a Christian family  they could still listen to BBC so that was the  the entire existence was the war and the topics were just that.
And we finally found a place in a house where we hid.
My father took a look  he -- he saw partisan songs there  at the time that the -- everything was going bad for the former partisans  so he was very handy a nd he made a hiding plac e under the -- the dining room table.
And those were to help her -- people who were either anti-Fascist  or Jewish  hiding .
We were already by this time in hiding and the rest of the ghetto was hidden.
But amazingly e nough  after -- after we talked to othe r people  one of th e local people say \ Oh  there is another Jewish family in hiding\  -- I forgot where it was.
No more Hebrew schools  and the economy's changed complete  everybody was hiding things; if things get lost  couldn't buy nothing.
I don't know why else it had to be done at night and in hiding.
So were going to have to go into hiding  and we have to disperse.
Was this was it one op one room  and this is just was in that room?
That means you have  you have a...you  you learn the...you learn the tricks how to not be beaten  how to  uh  stay in hiding if it's necessary.
How long did it take for you to find another hiding spot?
Till my father one day said to us...this was also September  like 15 because before 15...15 was my birthday...and I remember sitting with my mother and with everybody there from hiding from the bombs and I said  \ That's my birthday.
But  I was without in a hiding place and I didn't know what to do because they didn't let in strangers  the villagers.
And I guess that was it  but no utensils  or anything else  because when we were into hiding  we lived with ot her families  not Jewish families  Greek Orthodox families  so they had their own household.
Although helping Jews in any way was forbidden by the German authorities  many Belgians  including nuns  priests  and ordinary citizens risked arrest  deportation to concentration camps and even their lives by helping Jews in various ways like providing money  false I.D. cards  fake ration coupons for food  and by hiding Jews  in particular children  from the Gestapo and Belgian collaborates.
Over there you had no time to think about that   because there was no way  if the boys are hiding  the men are in offices  where do you get that stu ff?
Didn't know what it was like not to be in hiding.
And uh he was on the black list and he was hiding there waiting for a better place  and they were all arrested.
A -- A -- A barn  I -- Ill walk by  I mean  you know  on the island  the houses and they have like little barns in the back and there goes the memory to when we were hiding and then we had to jump from -- fro -- from the attic of that barn and -- and run away because the Germans will -- while the Germans were breaking the door to get in to get us.
They looked -- they told us  they look for where were hiding  and they didnt no -- they didnt no -- notice that we had build this -- this double wall to hide.
People were coming and hiding some gold  diamonds and rubies in the clothes  mostly the shoulders.
So we went -- he took us to his little farm and we went upstairs in his barn and we were hiding there.
And then I went to the hiding address  and it was a marvelous address in  in  near Amsterdam.
And in real life they were not allowed to kill Jews  but if they caught the Jews they killed them.
A German soldier stopped me and he said  \ What do you have hidden?\
For better or for worse  I don't want to expose our child to any possible attacks to Nazis hiding somewhere around the corner or under the rubble of a 17 completely destroyed city.
So when you were saying that your father was never sent to a concentration camp  i-it was it was that he went into hiding  so that Well  fir we just learned that first  when Kurt [indecipherable] Wrote that  y eah.
French collaborators arrested thousands of Jews and we found a hiding place in an attic and stayed there a few months until my mother arranged for false identification papers and a guide to take us to the Swiss border.
After the war  so long I was in Poland  she was hiding  because she -- I find out about it -- she knew that if I will get her  I will kill her.
Some ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 people were in their 20s  maybe 30s  and they couldn't make it anymore.
That woul d be when a hiding place would be blown for example  you know?
Not hiding  because...uh ...that was in Vladka's apartment  not hiding because I was discovere d by the Germans  but the colleague of the underground came to see Vladka  a girl...uh...she's alive.
But  as we ran and were hiding and she put the chickens under the stove and my brother was sitting near the little door and he was  he heard them coming in and speaking to her in Polish.
And this place wasn't included before in the ghetto  not in the first and not in the second ghetto.
We ha d many Jewish friends  and many suicided and uh  many started going hiding because they thought that was necessary.
And he was was going on  and then came the break and then this man really was hiding behind the door when brains were handed out  because he turned to me  and he says   you speak excellent German.
I knew that if they would be alive  I would have...they would have found me or something  but I knew that my brother's in Israel  that he probably is either in Israel or hiding somewhere else and the American Red Cross found out that he was fighting with the Jewish Brigade in Belgium and it took him a while to find me because he couldn't get away.
In the way  the Germans began to bomb and bomb and bomb.
And it was really two ma in places of hiding  except -- There was a third one.
In fact   there was some ghetto  it was not as large a ghetto.
Wha wa while you were in hiding  you you y ou didnt go to any more labor camps  you werent caught.
This is what I was delivered in eventually to the De Chot family and this is what they kept.. So what we are all in hiding  my parents not knowing whether Im alive or where I am.
I met Oscar Schindler the first time when I wa s hiding from the Gestapo who looking after me when I escaped from the Prisoner of War transport  and I was thinking that he's a Gestapo officer looking for me  and I still have my pistol  so I put the pistol behind  beh  behind my back  and I was waiting till my mother opened the house.
Well  my present husband  who was at that time just a friend  came over running to our little place and he said  \ Why don't they take her \  meaning me  \ to my hiding place?
I was working  yes I was you know  some small details and  and I was hiding  you know  hiding in a camp  but you couldn't hide very well.
So it was Septem ber through Dece -- you know  about three and a half months.
And as far as Im concerned  most Jews who still live in Holland are stil l in hiding.
She told them I was a kid  and I didn't know what I was doing; and I was hiding in the attic in the cold.
Your parents eventually became convinced they needed to go into hiding.
When I found such a place and the legendary escap e of from the ghetto  she fell very ill and when she came into the farm of hiding  it was absolutely necessary that Pnina should go there at least for a week because we couldn't bring a doctor.
And she said no  there was a Pogrom and killed the few Jew that is came out of hiding.
I'd go to attend class one month and then we we nt into hiding two or three months.
And in Limoges  I lived with a lady  Madame Bergot  who was hiding me and renting me an attic together with my friend  Eugene Bass  who was shot on the 10th of June  1944.
In August 1943  Marcel went into hiding with a Polish Ukrainian family.
Did you pray at all during that period when you were in hiding in [inaudible] Probably  in my own way.
The lady hiding me said they were collecting them in the square  that she saw this person.
This is tape number two  side B. And Im sorry I ran out of tape at the end of the last -- Yes.
And my father decide to have a hernia operation; he had been needing it for a long time  so he thought this would be a good time to have it  you know  and stay in hiding.
Al went into hiding with the ex-husband of a neighbor  an Indonesian immigrant named Tole Madna.
And we would head out to the barn and we would hide in the barn in the hay.
That we had -- somehow there was a terribly -- disturbance in the family  that my hiding mother was extremely anxious  that my hiding father was the one who wanted this  who did this  with all his heart.
And I don't want you to walk through them.ﬂ Because it was like um a low-graded neighborhood where they were hiding in  and he was afraid for me to walk there by myself.
But my sister insisted  \ And you better  you better Mom  you go also  go in hiding.
So while -- I -- I knew that you were listening to the radio before you went into hiding  but even while you were in hiding  you still listened?
So my grandmother left  and I was hiding in the fields.
And we were hiding underneath there  and they were shouting from -- they didnt go underneath the bunks  or on top of the bunks  they just -- Just yelled.
You know also be very poorly dressed because I'm sure in each hiding place it was the same situation like in ours so people started to undress their clothes and some were caught and some probably were shot.
But later on  for example  when they started to take in families in 1940 late 42 - 43  so we were hiding.
But the one from the -- the  the  the cousin that was in hiding  that was on Aryan papers  came back.
He was hiding for 20 years in E ast Germany  that doctor  from 1945 to 1965.
So and we were hiding  we were we lived on the in the woods   and it was the pa the trees  you know  under the trees  was free place around  was snow.
But I can imagine  after her own source  and he r own you know  it wasnt easy for her to be in hiding either  and then you find your child and your Interview with Jose Coltof November 9  2008 27child is a stranger to you and the child doesnt want you  and my mother didn't even know right away that it was right  and she asked to see that rattle  and if you remember in the beginning I told you she packed some things.
Uh we would ask how long...when will it be over  and he would say  the hiding father would say to me  and another day would go by...how long is it going to take and he would say soon  so we kind of...you know...anyway the uh we were liberated in May the 5th.
And comparatively to  lets say the Netherlands  th ere were in -- in the articles that I read  it was stated that more people were involved in hiding and saving Jews  that f-fewer Jews died.
So I remember we stole a big jar of jam and we ate it in hiding and we came back down and they were already two women in each other's hair accusing the other of stealing this jar.
Hiding just starts as we enter the house of one Mrs. de Swaan  3 who was a a fantastic woman 3 Truus de Swaan was a woman in Amsterdam who collaborated with Boogard family to help find homes in the country for Jewish children.
I remember there was only one bed where my grandmother  when she came from her hiding place  slept.
So  some of them were Jewish and some of them were not Jewish.
But  in the hiding  in all these places  you hid in differen t places and you basically had somebody who helped you find places and some of them you had... We couldn't  we coul d not do one thing without him.
Gave it to either Marta or somebody  you know  for hiding  but we had it  giving us a sense of security.
Everything was still  you know  ...uh...from the war  we ride in open trains you know  on those hiding out and so we got to..uh...Krak...Krakau.
Also in retrospect  could these people have helped hide hide the Jews  hide some of the Jews?
And -- my father never had anything to do with hospital or anything  but he said well  this is the only thing I can do at the time being  unless you want to go into the hiding.
Its not all Jewish children there was there or were there many?
And they came  and this couple were hiding a dog that they got attached to.
>>Bill Benson: Rae  it's so difficult to imagine what life was like for your mother and a young child  you  being part of a partisan group hiding in the woods  in the forest in very difficult primitive conditions and hunted continuously by Germans.
On Thursday there were twin brothers...they were farmers across the way from where we were in hiding  who had been called to go to German  you see  and they didn't go.
Times were very intensive  and as I said I was in the Creche and then the  uh  razzias started taking people from the streets  bringing in peopl e from hiding.
At that time I already knew that there were displaced person camps  and my girlfriend  because she was in hiding and her husband  they were able to recover some things that belonged to her parents.
And that's when you could come out when everybody else was hiding from the bombing.
You know  everybody found -- you know  had found some places where they hid.
They heard -- they heard -- when [indecipherable] they looking for the hiding place  couldnt find a place where to hide  and they were -- they were called to report for -- for deportation.
My father and my sister and I  we had a friend was worked uh a district attorney and he was a Party man and we were in his house hiding and they came in to look for us.
I contact this person  and he notified the 200 people they should go into hiding who were on the list.
But we knew  for two pounds of sugar  the Germans gave a proclamation: If you bring one Jew a 6family  two pounds of sugar  they did it.
Tell us about the Debrackelaers and what your life was like in hiding with them.
I say  \ Why are you taki ng and arresting a ma n who is already 70  time already to die  and you lock him up because they find out a hiding place?\
But those guys couldnt come in the street any more  because you didnt know if you saw a young man or a woman that they were Gestapo  so they we re -- they really had to go in hiding.
One day this happened and the next day you went into hiding?
One day he called 18 and he said  this is the gover -- some government calling  and they know that he is -- hes hiding somebody and theyre going to come over and get me.
Uh  we came from a place in Isbitsa  a  a town in Poland  and  uh  we  we didn't know where we're going  we  and the place that they  they guarded all the Jews and that they send them  and they send them away  we were hiding there  but the Germans didn't leave so we eventually we had to come out  and then they took us all to a train  to the station  in uh  in uh  -----train  cattle trains  and they loaded them as full as possible  and we  the whole night we travelled without food and things.
That story with the hiding in the attic in Coterrey was a very scary situation because I had just come back from the mountains  and I didn't want to be caught again.
Fritzi and I  we were sitting and we were looking out the window.
And youre hiding behind a veil  and -- My two -- how do you call them?
So we were hiding there for a few days  my mother  my sister  my grandmother that time.
She had been hiding in 36 the apartment of some Latvian family and from time to time she had to pay them rent  in quotation marks.
Well the peas made a lot of noise   and that was going on the nerves of my cousin that was hiding with us.
She was in the hiding and for her  the situation was worse 5 5 because she went to the Gestapo and they knew her face.
The basement had a trap door through which you--we came in  uh under a floor in the build- ing.
Tell me something  was JDC on e of the places that  or group that were going into Poland to try and find Jewish children who were or had been in hiding?
They They were in they were in a hidden there were six Germans with machine guns hidden in a cave.
And then I ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 18 found out what happened to the other people.
Maybe they ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 24 even didn't claim.
Most of the time we were hiding out during the day and we were on foot at night.
Gail  I tried very hard to hide my identity because I wanted to be accepted as an American.
They have special privileges  so the militiamen would come in  knock at your door  and try to find you and then you start hiding.
We were hiding in a house outside of the ghetto  and the next day on November 14  1941  that Aktion started.
I know he told us later he was hiding in the back of the office because if somebody rang the bell  as a Jew and because of his ID card  he would have been arrested immediately.
Then they were there and it was their child and what we...my partner and I did...we were looking...we we nt to Friesland  to the north  and looking for contacts  and to look for hiding places.
And we made tunnels over there because that's where they were hiding machineries.
Who told you to go into the ghetto  to take your things to the ghetto?
If a German found any person hiding a Jew  they would just shoot them on the spot  no questions asked.
You know  the fate of the Jews in hiding was terrible with the moment when the Polish Uprising came about or happened.
No  Ill tell you about my both my pa rents  my father went in a different direction  he went  and my mother ran into a hiding place of a neig hbor up in the thing.
A nd I jumped in a car  I was hiding in there  and just tried to look outside for what I see it looks like the German or the guard  or he didn't want to do  because he  I don't know what happened.
I mean at that point there was no place of hiding and I had a feeling that if nuns are not going to help us  you know  then there's no sense going on  and they told us they were crowded  that they had a lot of infants.
She says no  thanks a lot  but -- but she -- I asked if was news about my mother  but everybody wa -- were -- there were anxious moments  you know  during all the hiding  and so forth  but theyre all very well  and extremely anxious to see you  and so dont tarry.
Wife) Oh yes  you know she told me she was hiding  the same what we was. (
Yes  they  they were looking for hiding places where they hid the children.
The chances for survival depended upon at what point in time  uh  a Jew found himself  and  and various situation  be it on false papers  be it in hiding  uh  be it in  in a camp.
And they came to me and asked me if I could find hiding places  and I had a list of 5 000.
You know  to this -- you know  to try to tell you what a ghetto was  they took -- they chased us out from our home and th ey made picked up rapidly from other homes and they put barbed wire around and this was the ghetto.
And we...we...we was hiding that because when the Germans would know that there is a kid...and you know we hide that girl.
Yes  no more in hiding and I wa s this family  old  sick  uneducated people who Edwarda Rorat 6 February 25  1996 Page 6 saved my life and who are poor  who work hard  and I also work hard with them.
How did you get in and out of the ghetto when you were What?
I dont -- I dont -- didnt know anyone who was hidden  but we were really the last Jews.
By the time I was hidden  my mother wasnt told anything.
Comes I hear...when I stay in the top on the straw and the...it was standing near the hiding where they take the...the people  the Jewish people  in the truck  and it was near but I hear everything and I hear what the...how they shot.
When we -- w hen he came back  we  the hiding Jews  had the first choice before they would get their part.
So we -- although we didnt know why the Jews went into hiding  we were not going to -- to wait.
What were some of the hiding places that were used for you and your family and the other refugees when for example there was a raid?
And the entrance to the hiding place was very cleverly disguised: it was an entrance from the -- actually where the toilet is there was a wall and the wall had wooden blocks.
I remember Pavellas  the first house we went  when he learned that this guy said something about us being Jewish  and hiding  and you know  he came to notif y us.
So he opened the gate and this is...we want to get into hiding  but not with the sick  and he said there's an empty barrack  so we came to a barrack and he opened the door.
It would be easier for When you were in thewhen you were in the woods and y ou were in hiding  do youhow aware were you of the war and what was going on?
And we finally found a place in a house where we hid.
So  I took them over to the same place wh ere Lisa was  but she couldn't be in the same building but next to it was another building  and they were hiding over there  staying there for a while.
And in other countries like Poland  France  Germany and anybody hiding a Jew was stood up against the wall and shot.
This was one -- End of Tape One 35 Beginning Tape Two Okay.
He dyed his hair blond and went into hiding and did all kinds of reckless things  traveled and went everywhere.
The last time we survived after we went out from different hiding places and it turns out they discovered  I don't know   not all of them  but most of them were discovered  but the last time is  we were hiding in a place in a house under a bed  a broken bed  what the place was checked and looked maybe a 100 times and that we figured that is a good place to hide.
Josie's mot her was able to secure a hiding place for Josie in a convent in Bruges  Belgium.
So where did you first go when they found hiding for you?
One sister did nothing but transport Jewish children to and from hiding places .The mother was engaged in -- imprisoned in underground work.
Theres always in your life a reminder of the -- those years that we were in hiding  or even be fore.
What happened  and also how old were you when you no longer needed to be in hiding?
But that was a ideal hiding place  this whole ground because everybody knew that there are the Germans there.
She was hiding a group of Jewish people in the attic of Vilnius University library.
And next to me was a woman who had a little child with her  a little girl  and she uh told me that the people who came to arrest them from in the hiding places said the same thing with the same words as the Jewish Council said...as those guys said who arrested us  \ Take your children with you.\
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 15 Now we were prepared for anything because of the stories we heard.
As you said  first you had come out of hiding  you were taken to a place where there was lots of other kids and you're free to play and do all the things kids do  started school.
Most of them were caugh t. It seems that our hiding place was the best  was the best.
Why don't you pick it up  I think you were I was  I was nervous  and  and uh  and worried about my aunt and uncle  and um  I decided one morning on a Sunday  early  that I would go and visit them where they were in hiding.
I mean the staying in the hiding place would have been just terrible.
We all came out  we all naturally didn't smell the best  and they start beating us with the uh butts of their gu--of their guns or the butts of their rifles  and they congregated us all  we were actually the last  the last of the ghetto  because after us  the ghetto was  the ghetto was completely liqu--burned down  ever--and everybody who was hiding in the walls or in the attics was completely burned.
Can we...before we moved into the hiding  I would like to take you back into Warsaw before you leave.
So we better go and find -- I mean  actually he found a -- a good hiding place  away from the rest of the villagers.
They just get together and form a band  and they came to bring a serenade to the Jews who were hiding in the Parish hall.
Was there were there Jews in your part of Berlin that you associated with?
When we went into hiding  we were planning it  I said to him  I wont go u-unless you meet my conditions.
and in the steps are the hiding  and some policemen gave out.
Most Dutch Jews probably were betrayed by Dutch rather than those were in hiding.
>> Bill Benson: Your mother's experience was just beyond description what she went through.
I was leaving them at the peak...I...I had realized that the...that we were in hiding more or less and...uh...I...I was torn to go  but I mean I could not leave my father's letter...uh...unanswered and he had already  of course  left his village  so he expected me to be in Lyon.
So  but well  why I say I was lucky  because I have many friends that were in hiding  and they were bounced from place to place to place.
And y-you -- you had people who were 50 percent Jewish  25 percent Jewish  whod been in hiding  or they didnt have food cards because they didnt want to proclaim.
We found out later that that those tunnels were being made because the Germans were developing secret equipment  missiles  buzz bombs  and other equipment that they had in mind  that they were hiding in those tunnels.
My cousin had said  ﬁYou better go to The Hague  theres a group of kids there  they all were in hiding  and they sing songs  and they dance  and then there are also nice girls there.ﬂ Well  I -- here I was  I was 18 or 19  never been USHMM Archives RG -50.549.02*0051 37 kissed  never been to bed with a girl  you know?
We were hidden in a little wooded area  hardly wooded enough not to be seen.
We realized that it's ove r and  you know  the talk was evidently people that wanted for other people that were hiding  to know that it's safe to come out.
