Even the nurses from the school were take n out of the ghetto for work to the hospital  18 even to the German hospital.
SWB: When you're starved like that  as a nurse  what is the description  the scientific description of what happens to your body when you don't  when you're starved like that.
But I am like the sister  some says I'm their mother  some tell me I am their doctor.
So when you still went to a Girl Guide meeting  would you leave the hospital  and put your Girl Guide outfit on?
>> Bill Benson: Before we come back to your stay at the Madna family  you mentioned that your mother found refuge by taking a job in the same psychiatric hospital that your dad was in.
But throughout all the time in the hospital and through experiments and through horrible times  I always felt that Rene was alive and I said that I have to stay alive to take care of him.
She got the women doctor and an other doctor who was present.
So all they told us is you stop the German refugees who are on the road  and you make them take you back to town into a hospital.
Because -- Ok -- He -- He would have gotten those because he was a doctor?
You see it was one hospital in town and one doctor  and this doctor was on everything.
So he took me to the hospital  immediately he opened it.
Now  in Papilys   that was where your parents would go to church  was They thats where the churches were  thats where the churches  the stores  the doctor  th-the all the fo that served many  many villages around.
I dont remember nothing else until I came to in that used to be a German military barrack what they turned into like a hospital.
But they had the hose...uh...the hose that cleaned the floor  the concrete floor in that hospital.
And so when I saw her in the crib in the hospital  and she was the sister  well oh  I cant play with her.
We stopped -- the sick among us  every town there was a hospital  we put the sick among us to be in the hospital; no t to be cured or anything  just to rest for a couple of days  then take them out  sick as they were  move on.
That's one thing it was  there was every sign of it  you know  like there was military establishment  so we put  we put in our rooms and bunk beds you know and uh so you start up police department an employment office  everything was kind of temporarily  and a hospital  of course was a hospital there because it was a military establishment previous to when we arrived.
As they came back to Balti  my cousin Zioma went in to the army after a little while  because the war still went on  and lo and behold  he appears in Bucharest in the uniform of the army which freed  you know  so you can imagine our -- because the la st we knew was -- of him was when that doctor found them and brought them the -- the blanket.
In the meantime  I used to go to the hospital to see the people who came back from concentration camp was in very bad shape.
And she said  ﬁ[indecipherable] two guys who have been on a motorbike  they had an accident  in the hospital  and they come out and need their clothes ﬂ so I washed them.
There were more people  she has a good be d  and -- and all of a sudden they came  that the ho -- the hospital that is the same town is a hospital and there are lots of sick soldiers  and refugees and there no people to take care of them .
Oh  the escape  and then the the troops and all  so s o when I did get back  Im not sure which hospital it was  but it was reported ; Robert Max   social se number a army speciali the number of my my my Dog tag number.
So I approached the gi rls who are um working in so-called \ Revier\ -like hospital.
And then they were transferred on to some other hospital  if they couldnt make the trip all the way across  you know.
38 I have no idea  but I knew that he was the main doctor  because when I went when I went and I was so sick with fever  I knew that one boy  one boy went or man  he had done something with his finger  you know  I don't know what he  just took a scissor and cut and cut and cut to the bone.
If you work in the hospital they give you food to eat  you know.
Can I tell you something interesting about -- by that time  we didn't have a doctor and they brought a bunch of women from the Warsaw uprising  gentile women.
I spotted a nurse who looked to me Jewish and I said look  please  watch over me.
He...while we were still in Vienna  he had kidney trouble and uh he...a doctor came from the village  looked at him at that uh camp or the internment hotel and said uh you better go to the uh next town  to the provincial capital which was and uh get admitted to the hospital  all checked out.
There was a doctor and he was old and he was a bachelor  and he had a sister who was a dentist  and they volunteered to stay.
To -- my doctor  Dr. Jessup  told me  ﬁWhy dont you take him boxing or judo?ﬂ So I took him for judo.
>> Frank Liebermann: The following day  a reporter for \ T he Dayton Herald \  which was one of the two main newspapers  gave him a ring and said  \  Doctor  I'd like to see you.
One of our man his name was Finkel 25 went back to the camp where I was working and there was another hospital too  and there were rifles and there were pistols and they were what's the name other things  what do you need?
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0025 43 Yes  he -- he was -- he was one of the key figures in -- in Berlin when we were taken from the hospital to the -- to the Jewish community and were told that from now on  we were the agents of our own destruction.
I had experience learning  as if you want to be a doctor  you have to be do what you have to do.
I -- I wou -- I wou -- what happens if they s -- I -- I mean it was unclear what would have happened if the doctor found reason for me not to be put on the outgoing transport  I dont know.
I dont want her alone.ﬂ So  Im very fortunate to have a caring doctor like she is.
They purposely tried to contract typhoid and they did so they died of the typhoid.
So a doctor came  gave her a needle and he killed her.
And  well to make a long story short  he arranged for them to have diphtheria  quote unquote  and they were immediately transferred to the hospital because of a call  again through the chain  saying that  well  the Germans were terribly afraid of diphtheria  they had to take those contagious children out of the home and isolate them.
And went to the hospital and they diagnosed the obvious  I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0015 41 had TB.
But she was in during the whole war  because they needed nurses and she was a registered nurse.
I don't k now if it was a doctor or dentist.
And so the theater was very important  the hospital was important  the workshops  the committees.
Th e transit camp was shifted to the Jewish hospital of Berlin  which was then the last place  I mean sort of Jewish owned building in the city.
So  in Bellvie w Hospital some other doctor said  Anna I think they are searching for you.
Soon as I got out of the hospital they again want to put me in that -- so -- in that un it  and I said sorry  but I am s-still quite sick and I c -- Im not yet ready to work.
And she was sh-she was a nurse  a glo ri-glorified nur -nurse in cant remember the name of the place for a rich family  that hired a British Like a governess?
End of Tape Five Interview with Ninetta Feldman September 14  2010 73Beginning Tape Six Okay  you you wanted to go back to the hospital in in Tartarna   is that Tartarna   Tartarna .
I was scrapped several times  three or four times on my head  and right here  and here  and the hair never grew b ack and there was a piece of bone missing  but luckily I was  I was a pretty good healer and although I did have puss in it I was healed by this doctor.
But because I had worked for a doctor and gone through McLaflins medical school  I knew one bone from the other.
And... and then when the doctor permitted  and when I was a certain weight and...and I could really go  the doctor permitted and I visited them.
I introduced my wife to those friends that I was introduced to by my friends from Buffalo  this CPA and this other doctor.
Interview with Julie Keefer 36 August 9  2012 She also showed me this huge hospital and she said yeah  that was a big Jewish hospital.
I ran home and brought it  and I just walked into the typhoid hospital and I brought it to them  you know  stuff.
My fa ther went  came to Lieg e and went in...we had one big hospital.
Yugoslavia because they thought that nothing is going to happen  and Italy done it because some -- for some Viennese Jews  especially I would ca ll it aristocrat  professor  doctor and genius  Yugoslavia is not very appealing.
I had terrible sinusitis  and the doctor said  you must get out of this area  because otherwise youre going to have trouble breathing  constantly.
And also he was angry about this woman doctor  that she never re ally k-kept contact  and shes well off  and she said  when your father left Poland the German pa y him a big reparation and it shoul -- part of the money belongs to us.
Following his arrival in the United States after the war  he eventually became a doctor of veterinary medicine.
Walking out from the hospital  and looking around the buildings  somebody screamed in Polish  Moniek  Moniek   it was [indecipherable] dont you recognize me?
I have told you so much about it.ﬂ And the doctor said  ﬁIm so gl ad to meet you  hes ta lking about you all the time.ﬂ And we exchanged pleasantries  I dont k now exactly what  and my dad and I  we hugged  and we kissed.
Then we get into the Russian liberation camp  the hospital and then I get typhus.
I remember when I was doing -- I was in radiation therapy  and it was very close to Mayas delivery  I would s -- asked the rad -- the -- the doctor there  the radiologist  ﬁCan I take time off when my daughter has her baby?ﬂ And for the moment she thought it was an out of town daughter  so she would say to me  ﬁI cant let you stop radiation.
The Jewish ghetto administration sent in a kitchen detail once a day to bring soup.
We  we really couldn't walk  and the people in the hospital ward were left behind.
And I was -- I-I left in hospital  because sick people and people who work in hospital stay  the other people who can walk  go for march.
Uh  I asked in that letter that I wrote to the administration  \ Is Sister Joan of Ar c by any chance still at your hospital?\
The hospital in-interestingly enough was created  I guess  and born as a Jewish hospital  I dont know how far back.
And then when he became a doctor in Lithuania  he was our doctor.
And what was -- 2 She was not a maid  but she was like a part of the family  but she was helping my mother  too  to cook  to clean the house.
Oh  he goes to his holster  unstraps the holster  takes off his gun and says  ﬁIm gonna shoot that bastard right here.ﬂ So the nurse said to him  of course in German  ﬁYou are not going to do any such thing 80 Herr Commandant  in my office.ﬂ Well  he actua lly didnt shoot me  but she put me someplace and I stayed there for a little while.
Some were in their bunks  they were they were stacked bunks.
On the way to Spain  this was already during -- this was in 1940  during World War II had already started  but there were ways of getting out  he got sick and rather than to be taken to a hospital he was sent to 25 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD Theresienstadt  where he perished.
So  the main doctors didnt take  if you needed a doctor  money was no good  because they couldnt buy nothing for the money.
And he told us afterwards  yes  it was ca -- she was a nurse.
And later on the doctor got in touch with me and he said  you know what  he said  the German authorities want me to take under administration 10 000 houses of Jewish  confiscated Jewish property because most -- well  most  I don't know whether most  but many of the houses were owned -- apartment houses were owned by Jews -- and he said they were all confiscated and they had to be administered and he said  what do you think?
There was Kunneman sitting  he had a court appointed doctor with him  he claimed to be very sick  and these eight judges.
Wasnt that in the summer when we were in the hospital.
I should perhaps mention that my fath er voluntarily worked for one year in a Slovak 33 concentration camp as a dental doctor.
And I remember...I remember only a doctor coming to my bed  and I thought he had a syringe in his hand.
So  British liberty  and I fell in a coma  and they took me into the hospital  and I wa s in the hospital  I dont A2: Does he talk so fast?
Later on after three months I took him to the doctor and he lost three pounds and I said to my husband  \ I'm not going to work anymore.
Howd it happen that you got interested to become a doctor?
So I had to really be careful how I got to the hospital.
Interview with Stanis awa Tobis January 28  2015 176 disbanded  and then my father and he and father got not too too young  single woman  and he was working in th e hospital  you know  and I dont know what he was doing  what maybe sweeping  you know  because at that time he he probably doesnt know English at all.
We ran a restaurant in a little town in Germany  Elizabeth and I  and we overheard a conversation at the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0003 35next table  where one person said  no  Herr doctor  that goes too far.
Then once I got out of the hospital  I joined my sister in the orphanage.
It was Eugenia Goldberg who was a nurse  and persuaded the SS woman to let her do something for me.
And somebody called the hospital and wanted to meet the parents of this young boy.
So Lustig let it be known throughout the hospital that was in October of ‚42  that up to then it was sort of  you know  it was sort of dispersed.
They said my two sisters  when they came home and met at home -- they never told me but they thought she died in a hospital but she was shot with the other people who couldn't walk in the day of the liberation.
And I remember when I -- Basha was sitting on the stairs  on the day I -- I was supposed to go to the hospital because I had Caesarian with Charlie  first I took Philip to this medical facility for a check-up.
He was working in hospital and he said he would find some work at the hospital.
And then after you got into nurse' s training  did you like it or think- It was all right.
So  I never believed that in that age I'm going to fall in love with somebody  because I think I love him more than my life because after that he was so sick a few times he was in the hospital.
Because I overheard that in that German hospital girls are coming for work.
She says  \ Lilly needs her tonsils out.ﬂ So she put me in the hospital to take my tonsils out.
And my mother was ag ainst  she said  ﬂYou are such a capable person  why do you want to be a nurse?ﬂ She said  ﬁI decided.ﬂ She said  ﬁYou are afraid for blood  and youll be a nurse  working?ﬂ And she said yes.
And I went to this doctor  the German doctor  and he said to me  \ You are pregnant.\
They we re teachers  and he and I was always hearing of that  working as a nurse  and they had six rooms and they gave us the best room.
She got me out of it...got me out it  and I left that hospital.
You know  in a restaurant was a different schedule so one day he stuck himself with a fork in the dishpan and he got an infection and couldn't and they sent him to the hospital and he got all bandaged up and he couldn't work so he  his boss said if you can't wash dishes you are no good to me.
While you were working in Germany  and perhap s even in the hospital you stayed at for so long  did you ever experience anti-Semitism  post-war anti-Semitism?
When I looked at those jars  you don't have parts like that on display if you're just a hospital or something.
Be cause its -- unless I misheard you  you said that you were taken from the hospital back to Birkenau.
I was going to be trained as a childrens nurse  and I was put into a day nursery.
speaks foreign language here] I: In the barrack of the hospital.
I wanted to study  and I wanted to become a doctor  they didnt expe -- accept me.
So I experiences I mentioned to you  red box in Poviak forgot to tell you about fleas in hospital in Auschwitz.
Well  there was no hospital that I knew of  but we believed him.
2/8/95 NURSE PAT LYNCH Page 3 no muscle  just skin and bone  there was no place to give them a hypo.
Sometime USHMM Archives RG-50.549.01*0004 16 thereafter  this Doctor Kilina had to flee because the communists had already taken over Czechoslovakia and someone had something about him.
So when he arrived to this hospital  I was already in another hospital; and he kind of repeated two  three times.
Parquet  uh parquet  the real parquet that I had to scrub with my feet and the big pads and I stayed there until my sister  my middle sister...my my sister Bertha wa s also placed in a doctor's home in the country for that purpose also and she was not feeling well and the doctor told her to go home to rest and that's when on a Sunday morning on May 5...I used to go home ever y other weekend on my bicycle.
We spent two days and two nights on that train  having the satisfaction of seeing German POW army officers and army doctors of a nearby military hospital bringing containers of soup and ladling it out to us.
Also  the Chief of Staff of Good Samaritan Hospital gave him hospital privileges even though he was not a member of the Medical Society.
And in the hospital we had a stamp here  and they eradicated.
But I had to have a physical examin ation by a German doctor and who determined that I had a chronic edema  or whatever he called it  and then  I don't know  whatever else his diagnosis was  and then they decided to have me checked by a psychiatrist.
He was uh  if you see him on the street walking  Mengele  if you see Mengele on the street  and you know he's a doctor  you put your life in his hands.
And I spent one difficult year in a state hospital near Sikesville  Maryland.
You only have to have a cold oh  you went in hospital.
They all went into the arts  only the youngest one is a doctor.
Which they help you with go a little bit shopping  go to the doctor  clean a little bit  light cleaning  shopping It makes a difference.
And when I came down there  they said to me  ﬁWe are going to close this hospital and you can go now.
But he told them  look  I am giving  for example  20 li -- li -- documents for life for th e hospital doctors.
I cant I blacked out what happened after that  but the part I do know  from that hospital  how we got out of there  I dont know.
He had a friend  a good friend who was a doctor.
The doctor is about two years older than me  so of c ourse  he was like a leader of this little group in -- in Zabno.
But I wasnt in -- aware of anyone  who was being mistreated  though we had once a patient in the hospital and I think he became a well known -- what do they  the black -- oh  they had a -- Panthers?
And again  I know my daughter-in-law  God bless her  sh-shes a nurse -- my -- my husband -- my husb -- my son is a doctor  so who else would he marry?
My  yeah  two younger sisters both went to Jewish hospital nursing school and got their RN's from...from the hospital.
There was a doctor  you were saying  in Novaky No  there was a doctor in camp.
In an Army hospital for a year  and that was the end of my nursing career.
We went to the hospital and I brought something with me and I introduced myself.
You said you then worked in the gentile hospital -- Yes. --
So I listened to the doctor and I got my da my daughter  five years younger than my son.
We had a -- a tent hospital in Austria before we moved to the camp.
I remember -- it must have been a doctor who came to see me and I remember these hot glasses on my back.
The middle of August  after I left the other office  two days later  from the old office I worked from  my other doctor  there was a pharmacist next door to it.
But still I have a connection with this  from this infirmary  of a nurse who was connected with the Skopsiva  knew him.
And one day he came back to me  this German doctor  and he said to me  \ You know what?
They were screaming and they were trying to touch them and  uh  fellows and  uh  he said he'll never forget it and of course the doctor who was  uh  who could speak Polish was  was  the doctor told  uh  Kosiack told the doctor to have the people who now had the German machine guns and everything to please stack them up and  uh  we'll take care of them.
I had to go  because in the hospital  they didnt have the patches for the chemotherapy.
And from that from the camp  you from from the hospital  when you were released from the hospital  where did you go?
So many of them had been killed  and uh  I didn't  after they left there I didn't see too much of them unless they got sick again  and then they came back to our hospital that following summer.
I was also going to gymnasium at that time and I was in the fourth year of gymnasium.
That was  we were fortunate there was still one Jewish hospital left in town so thats where she went  yeah.
And then after they one more thing  when I when they took me to the hospital and I lost consciousness or for two weeks I didnt know what what was going on.
Now... I went to my city where I am...where I am... Not where...I went only to the city where I worked as a doctor only for few--for one  two days.
She will cry.ﬂ I said  ﬁNo  dont do that  but is she alive  or is she not?ﬂ ﬁYes  shes alive  shes breathing all right.ﬂ So I go to the hospital  the doctor meets me right there at the entrance  he takes me down [indecipherable] emergency room.
I was told to report to the police station the next morning  and they beat me up before they put me into jail  but I was bleeding.
Okay  so this Israeli contingent  140 men  were allowed to inhabit a trench between the Augusta Victoria Hospital on the one side and some other marker on the other side which was on the apex of the hill on the top of the ridge.
And the next day  the whol e hospital will be evacuated  with the sick  you know  to get away with them.
There was a DP hospital not too far away  at St. Tatillion  and the more serious cases were brought there.
He got a job on the staff of the Jewish General Hospital legally.
When I heard this  I phoned him and I said  \ Are you Doctor Reinhard Hohn?
The doctor wanted to give him massive dose of antitoxin  and I had to translate to the German medic what they were going to do.
And it -- well  it wasnt so much his shouting that kept me there  but the doctor who gave me the leave  turn out to be staying at the apartment across the street from us.
Mengela  the famous doctor in Auschwitz and others  all benefited from this.
We all -- we had a -- we went to work in a hospital -- bib -- in Wales  I think it was.
Then this Landsberg camp had a hospital and Dr. Elkous was in Landsberg together  and he was in charge of the hospital.
And I went to that doctor  there was another doctor who I was told to go to.
Of course  again  the thing was that my father considered himself lucky originally because he was exempted from the fo rced labor because of a doctor certificate  but now that labor was the only thing that exempted you from deportation  that turned out to be not so lucky.
And it was a psychiatric hospital there  and he was in charge of all the woman patients  I think  at that hospital.
The only thing I knew  we had a hospital in Saylag  the only thing I knew nobody should go to the hospital.
And then the mother  the sister  Betsy and I were together all the time  except for the short time wh en I was very ill and I was in the hospital.
Then [indecipherable] my daughter   Sarah  she went to the red -- Red Cross hospital.
IRENE WEBER Page 6 went to school  I practiced in the hospital  and when I finished I got my diploma  I got a job in Poking which was a DP camp also.
The school was not far from  when she leaves the school  came to the hospital  we went to the cantina  after cantina  we went to the swimming pool in the hos pital  went back  go the neighbors  listen to radio  it was  my husband came home  he called me during the week and was very easy.
Because in the beginning they said to me there wasnt any hospital  and I remember that my mother was in the hospital.
Into a very nice estate and the childrens companion or nurse was ill so there were four girls .
My mother tried to find somebody to take me ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 to the hospital  which was nearby  but nobody was there.
So we came back from this town  from this hospital  we came back to Kollupzowa.
And people were saying that if that one doctor there would cut the leg off  the person would die for sure.
And the doctor just told me the date  when to expect.
You know  you specialize on one thing and you do one thing only and you speak to this doctor about something else  he doesnt know.
We lived -- my mother  when we got into the ghetto  she took sick and she was in the hospital.
That's where her parents lived and my mother and Ruzia  and her father was a very prominent oral surgeon  Doctor Katzner.
And this Organish Koppage   that Captain Organish Koppage was there  and we were helpful in getting three people: the doctor from Kokpekti  what I told you my mother was sick  then he Yeah.
SL: The doctor  he didnt want to give it to her.
Oh yes  there was there was we had a neighbor who was a a doctor and her son was a lawyer  he was a member of that Judenrat .
Probably the lieutenant maybe got orders or someone from the other area there at the hospital maybe was in charge or something.
It was in this cell or tent there was hospital and the American nurse let me box of milk chocolates.
We tried with a hospital too but it was but it failed.
I didn't want to make trouble for the doctor who let us in.
But it was a -- a hospital which was also a municipal hospital.
She joined my father in the same psychiatric hospital  in her case pretending to be a nurse's assistant.
He didnt wanted be over here  he wanted go to a doctor  he di couldnt speak English  we couldnt speak English.
And I remember how the doctor sat down with me and he said to me it was like the fourth or the fifth day  and it takes like six days  twelve days from the time when you get sick until you go through the crisis.
Again  I was in one of my little graves  and I was very ill  I don't know how long  but it was the spring of -- it was spring  I don't remember  and there I was and all of a sudden somebody was shaking me  and there were these two pair of boots  that's what I saw from my vantage point  and these were two Russian soldiers  and they kept saying  \ devushka  devushka  little girl  little girl\  and they shook me  and I finally woke up  and I was very ill  and they took me to a military hospital.
For instance  my mother worked in the hospital  in the German hospital.
It was a new camp there  a new hospital that they brought wounded soldiers from the Russian front.
And as part of my duties for a few months  I set up a hospital for German women who were presumed to have venereal disease.
So I went to the hospital and I only had a very short time  I dont remember exactly  ma ybe a whole hour or a half an hour  I dont remember that.
The doctor had some tablets  medicine  and he just pass out.
He beca me an -- a -- a doctor and he became a member of the armed -- German armed forces and he was in Russia all the time as a doctor  a German army doctor.
And then I took him uh through the camp situation  took him up to St. Tetillion  a hospital  up to Landsberg  Feldafing  so forth.
And and they decided that I have surprisingly  that I have a malaria  this German Au-Austrian doctor  Dr. Firsten.
I wanted always to be a doctor  but the year what I finished gymnasium -- you know what gymnasium is?
I was going from camp to camp because they had these places  these displaced persons camps.
And that was in May of 1952  and was in the hospital through the following January.
I got an infection but they stopped me and one time took me out of the line and I was going to the hospital.
Mother only bless us  and sister  they both are train for -- not doctor  below the doctor  how you call it?
I guess she took it and she came back to me  to the hospital.
That's why we had to stay in England awhile to take ca re of them and wait for things to calm down a little bit in Germany and France  so that--that was it until we rejoined our own hospital from this little--whatever that was.

Instead of being released  she was--the notice was that she was transferred to another hospital in Germany.
Because my study was industrial pharmacy in biochemistry and they give me a job to work at the hospital as a biochemist in the laboratory.
And when you were working in this hospital for 30 months  thats almost three years  did you intend to stay in Israel that whole time?
Did your sister die at home  or did she die in a hospital?
We were lucky to be the first ones to get injection of penicillin.
I was married to a doctor and I would have to be in the same hospital and I didnt want that.
So what happened after that in 1944  he was in the hospital?
I think the paper I gave you was signed by this doctor who became the head of this thing.
He wanted to take me as private nurse with him to Berlin  to Salandorf  where he was living.
And I have broken my leg  my hand here  and I was taken to the hospital instead to go home.
I am just happy that I could yes  there is something because the family of my cousin I told you about the medical doctor in San Francisco.
But she had to  whereas I sort of followed the classic route high school and college and graduate school  she  they went to nursing school which doesnt really  in those days  she didnt go to the university but to a hospital nursing program so they never had the chance to really develop their  oh how do I say this  their intellect in a way that I had.
My father committed or tried to show -- claimed to commit an act of suicide or -- and that gained him admission to a psychiatric hospital  pretended is the word I was looking for  pretended to commit an act of suicide and that gained him admission to a psychiatric hospital where he went into hiding.
When she noticed that I'm the one -- >> Warren Marcus: She's working at the hospital taking incoming wounded and there's her son.
And one of my school friend's father was a dentist and that's the dentist I visited.
It was a Catholic hospital  I remember there were all nuns there.
I think it was the 97th general hospital  Im not sure any more the number.
But they arrested me anyhow and I was br ought to a hospital because had placed this again  but this time not serious.
There I woke up  in a German hospital  which was all I needed  and with a big  s-swollen head  and it turns out that I had a fracture of the skull.
My mother was very much opposed to it and at prior time I had wanted to train as a nurse and go with the Dutch with the Allied Army into the Netherlands with the occupation forces and to be trained in England  but my mother would not give permission be...and I had to have her permission because I wasn't 21 yet.
He was a local doctor  and when the camp was established  they  of course  made him the doctor over there.
You said that while you were in the hospital  you were taking rifles and guns.
And he walked into the people there in the hospital there and he contacted himself with this group  and the people Dworecki was there like a Mikoi the whole group  about 20 people.
One beautiful gal  she was so pretty  she was a Jewish doctor  and she had tuberculosis  oh she was a very young  just beautiful  and I took care of her for a long time.
So we were in that place still for a long time because we were very  very sick and...and that was in Bergen-Belsen in this make shift hospital.
And not only that  had to go to the embassy in Paris and the doctor screened me like I was a -- a Michelangelo there.
He went to his boss at Sears Roebuck and said that  you know  these people will not be a burden  the man is a doctor  hell come to United States  hell practice medicine here  but Interview with Erika Tamar December 18  2015 37he needs this affidavit.
Well–what happened is that I ran out there and the lady who was running the place where I worked  her name was Ms. Zucker  and she was an acquaintance of that doctor who was the elder of the ghetto.
He was thrown out of a hospital window by the Germans.
You see  I was there with  in this ro om and once my aunt  who was a nurse  was walking on the street and she met somebody that she knew and she said to her  \ Where are you going?\
And it was a truly -- I mean  extraordinary pe rson  extra -- a nurse [indecipherable] 14 Do you remember her name?
When they let me out from the hospital  I still had casts 8 on my hand whether I could have more movement.
And the doctor ran out and...and she ran up  and she ran to the officer that was in charge and brought him over to my bed and I explained to him that we all infected with typhus and we would spread the typhus to the soldiers  they should leave us alone.
2 He wanted to be a medical doctor  and only way he could go to Gymnasium  he went to a Protestant Gymnasium.
And she was first in the hospital for a long time.
And at that time  when you had scarlet fever uh you had to go for six weeks into a hospital.
They the the Bricha from from Palestine  they used that hospital.
Here he... I...he finds... After all  I was trained by the Poles as a military doctor  you know.
And the hospitals wouldn't  as a foreign graduate  they wouldn't - weren't too anxious to give you hospital appointments either  even as a visiting or attending physician of course.
And she told it in the hospital that if I dont come back  because my husband is bad to me.
Uh my luck was that my wife was pregnant with a child  and at the end of that period uh the doctor said look  something has gone wrong  and it's only because of her uncertainty of where you are - it's getting worse.
indecipherable] had been in the hospital  the doctor had refused to take care of them.
She must have heard -- because since she was -- in other words  the to -- here was the Jewish hospital  next to there there was an annex Interview with Jack Bass October 17  2003 90where they had an old age home  and th ere was another ann -- another annex for children that had no parents  you know  and she had no parents  because the father was divorced  he couldnt take care of her  and wa -- di -- ch -- and the mother went away with her boyfriend to Shanghai and left her there.
But first they start to kill the innocent people  and the German dropped the bomb on the hospital.
He said it was for his heart  but the tr anslator and I probably agree it was a psychiatric hospital.
I taught nursing to -- to high school students for years.
At that time there was a strike an they could not move the boat at that time from Brenehauffer and other friend who came together at that time  Anna Novak  her husband was an attorney and he passed away and she married a Doctor Heller  not the same Heller  and he's with the Northwestern Medical School.
it was sh -- f -- like MASH  only without the hospital in the field tent.
Well  as far as I know  all the years I was in the ghetto  I wasnt ill.
When they see a case thats in the paper  where were taking on as somebody would say another cause or fighting  filing a case for someone whos an underdog or whos against the county or a hospital or against a coal company  they sort of take it for granted.
We had a doctor and he said th at nothing he can do for her  so we gave her a broom in her hand and that she is the one who cleans the barracks and that...with that broom she was sitting all the time in those barr acks.
I met my husband in Washington  D.C.  and he was a resident in surgery at that time Gallinger Hospital which is the District of Columbia Hospital.
But this doctor  my father did not want to ask him to come because he was bad.
by the curtain  you see doctor way to the left  Dr. Besser and his wife.
And I did volunteer work at a veterans hospital up to the age that I got married.
I don't know now  it's too long ago  whether it was  probably a both combina tion of him and the Jewish hospital in Hamburg  somehow a combination  I d on't know how they work ed together and he came out.
We have hospital going  children are being  babies are being born  at an enormous clip for that size population.
And th e hospital and the relief center were located in the British sector of Berlin.
So we arrived in and I remember that my father -- my father always liked his title-- you know he had his PhD and always calls himself doctor so and so.
I told [indecipherable] they are from this transport  they [indecipherable] in the hospital.
Their names just to record them I have to mention Jan Musdorf and Oleg Guretsky and they saved my life because when I went to hospital for the second time I really had pneumonia in full swing with pleurisy   water in my lungs  completely flooded  and if not for care of these two guys I wouldnt live today.
And he gave it to Ukrainian doctor  and this man w ear this coat  and every time I pass by  I saw my father coat  and I was wondering  is he going to give it back to us after the war.
So you got the impression like you were on an operating table; you are in a hospital and you see the nurses in white aprons looking at you as though you were dead already.
Somehow  I dont remember exactly how it happened  but I was back in hospital.
First was a Doctor -- this would be a hospital where I corroborated before  and he had played a very great part in helping.
What would you have said in a camp  there was no doctor to go to.
Thats what she was in that hospital when we supposed to take her Right.
My father knew  so he got a job as an orderly in the main hospital.
So  the first morning that Chaim made with  I don't know with wh at  with working in the hospital  not to go in the army when we saw that we get free in the army  and later this was not.
They took me to Kreinkinbau  that means hospital in Auschwitz located -- buildings  number of buildings  I think 24 or 25 something like that.
But we rented bikes and we rode around the countryside and then we were as-assigned to a Interview with Mary Bergquist 5 July 15  1998 general hospital  I cant remember the numbe r of the general hospital and we worked there with the boys that were being brought back from Europe.
And I remember this doctor  who was a dentist of mine  who I used to go with my pitten there to her during -- before the war.
But at the same time  they said  \ How -- it's so diffi cult to be a nurse.
I waited  and I got his soup and lu ckily and he could be in the hospital.
And  a colleague of my fathers  Dr. Sik in Libau was the head of the hospital over there.
I feel very good ﬂ and I always gave the report to the doctor  because he was from th e same hospital were I worked  the doctor.
She couldn' t tell them that she'd broke the leg by meeting...going out th ere...would have been a crim e. So she came and she had even...she could not even reveal how she broke the leg  but sh e was with a cast with a band aid which was done in a hospital in an emergency room  and very little  very provisional  but that...those days we could never even tell people she broke the leg because riding in a bike. \
He was a doctor  but... This is the Dr. Vee-ter I told you lives in Tel Aviv.
The gates from the jail opened  and they take us to the hospital.
What -- what was the standard kind of -- Well  it wasnt -- they didnt have the sort of tools at hand as you would have in a psychiatric hospital.
Can you tell me about the work you do for the Holocaust Museum?
So we actually had to leave her in the hospital  but there was another friend th at she met that stay ed with her.
The next day they took us to a different bunk and that bunk had some kind of preach beds.
But I had no choice  so I went to the hospital.
And I know it next morning  I end up in bed.
They bought a big estate and settled and bought a big mansi on and settled private hospital.
This is one of the rooms inside the Palace Hotel  which served as the barber shop and also as a first aid office for the doctor and a dentist who took care of the -- the inmates.
And I was a young doctor without any experience yet  just a piece of paper  that's all.
We got back to the United States  I spent that oh  a week or so on the boat in the hospital for a leg injury.
I said always  I -- I sneaked in to the hospital  because they are pre-preparing for Christmas.
First... After  of course  I got cons cious  I found out that the doctors... I was taken by the Americans into a nearby hospital in Gauting  near Munich.
She was in the hospital  she was very sick  she was in Rochester  in Minnesota  you know  where the Mayo Clinic?
Did they have a big hospital  or did you just rest in the monastery?
The doctor gave order that the  his French prisoners were the one who have  no they were the Zonder Commando  and he told them that wh en they take the  pick me up and put ‚em on the  throw me on the top of the bodies.
So  they were calling out by names one after another to an examining room and when my na me was called out I came to the doctor and I started crying.
So he was not just an administrative person  he was a doctor.
He had friends there  a doctor at the clinic at the factory.
I said I don't want to go to the hospital  I want to go home.
I went to Mount Sinai hospital  went through all the x-ray  all the -- all the tests  and they says  we don t find anything wrong  physically  just -- what he says  they call it something like -- not physically -- Psychosomatic?
It was not used -- my father took the street car to the hospital.
I dont know what So she she died in Kansas  where in she my brother called me  it was right at New Years  I dont remember how many years ago  but he called me and he said that Mother had to go into the hospital.

You soon found friends  and your assigned to your quarters  and we were in a little house just outside the hospital which had formerly been married quarters.
We'll move you to the hospital and you can do the office in the hospital.\
But he was dedicated and very happy to be able to be a surgeon  to be a doctor again  which he couldnt do under the German thumb.
So  if we were suspicious  we could ask the doctor or somebody to examine him  but Im sure Germans got through as Jewish displaced persons and probably lived a life as Jews.
And was assigned to a hospital  established hospital there and all of their wards went around a circle where the nurses were.
And eventually -- the doctor had it right on the money  slowly  slowly  slowly.
End of Tape #1 13 District (German) 14 Family of Josef Mengele 15 a decent woman (German) 16 air force (German) 8 Tape #2 02:01:00 Just finish that last story about the hospital with the German woman  the one  what your supervisor said about the letter.
They called it revere  which evidently in German it means hospital.
Everything was Jewish  you know  whether it was doctors or hospital  or whatever  you know.
Sure enough they were still there  and they knew that I am supposed to come  cause they knew my sister who was a nurse  who helped nursing as their -- their father when he was sick.
I lost a lot of blood  and they told me that I was lying there 2 hours or something like that and the first tanks came in and with every battalion comes a field hospital  and male nurses came and they found this little girl still alive.
And he had to see a doctor because the bleeding wouldnt stop.
In this restaurant the windows was covered with sandbags  and then was the people which survive from this hospital  they bring to this restaurant.
And so he put me in the hospital  first in a hospital in Kochendorf.
And because she was a nurse  she was looking after peo ple who had typhoid so they took her out again.
One was studying to be a doctor  and she say  come to Brazil  to Rio de Janeiro  they have nice -- I say in the meantime  I dont know.
Should I sa ve a young doctor who may survive and have children  or should I pick out a famous professor who is 80 years old?
But luckily there was one German nurse who had pity on her.
They did confiscate my school and they keeping their hospital  they keeping for certain t ime school for German children  families.
They took us from out everywhere we lived and we had to go to this hospital and stay there and we were there for a few weeks.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 8 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: So shooting and shouting and the hospital was burning--all of that was going on at the same time?
And when I wrote to the Czech authorities  they answered that they cannot find any supporting documents elaborating in details by the medical doctor  as to the exact cause of the death.
That Tricia who my father saved she was very lazy and she said I'm going to go to the   that's the hospital.
And so I landed in hospital  an d that was interesting too  this hospital.
Also it was safer because I had a nurse uniform with some kind of a white hat and I feel that I did not look so different in this.
And he said  ﬁO h  I wanted you to meet my doctor so badly.ﬂ And I started walking out and the doctor walked in and my dad smiled  ﬁThis is her  this is Sylvia  I have told you so much about it.ﬂ A nd the doctor said  ﬁIm so glad to meet you  hes talking about you all the time.ﬂ And we exchanged pleasantries  I dont know exactly what and my dad and I  we hugged and we kissed and I walked out and I met the O.D. man Sylvia Green 29 January 11  1996 Page 29 and this was the last time  might have been maybe a month or a few weeks before the liquidation of the ghetto and Im really happy I had a chance to go there to see my parents.
I remember they always told that story - the two of them was born the same night and a midwife - you know they didn't go to a hospital  like here - a midwife came to the house and they said - let's say  I don't remember who was born first  mein grandmother or mein grandfather  but the midwife said  you going to be like a pair  you going to be married and that is how it happened.
The doctor who attended me was sick and he didnt know the seriousness of the problem.
I had fever and the doctor said I must go away  get away from Amsterdam  from that fever place so to say and I went to Arosa.
By the way  also after that veto he had a vi sit from the Chief of Staff of Good Samaritan Hospital who said this is an outrage and they offered him staff privileges.
They sent me to be trained at Lexington  Kentucky where they had the United States Public H ealth Hospital for tubercul ar diseases later on.
The the that unit that SWB: Army Nurse JOHN KOMSKI: Army Nurse  yeah.
They had to operate again because they hadn't but the person who operated was a French military doctor  who was very good and very kind  and actually saved my leg  because gangrene would have set in.
And the Russians were nice doctors  they tried to do something  there was a woman doctor.
And the third time  they -- the doctor was like this and I go lik e that  I jerk back.
And this is how I accumulated the extra money that I needed for my son to be born in that hospital.
2/8/95 NURSE PAT LYNCH Page 12 go up and see her  that's for sure.
I know that at one point I developed a boil in my leg  and they took me to the infirmary and I was in the infirmary for several days I dont know whether it was a week or whatever and it was a friend of my mothers who saw my name  who was working in that infirm ary  who was a nurse in that infirmary  and when she saw my name and asked whether I know Pola Laks  I told her  ﬁIm her daughter.ﬂ That she saw to it that I was returned back  when I was through  that I was returned back to the same barracks from which I came.
He went to the synagogues  to the library  he brought me all kinds of books to the hospital.
But the doctor  you asked  Im sure he was a -- a standard inmate wa -- of some standing  I -- I dont know.
So tell me  this incident what that Mira was talking about  where she would be a Red Cross nurse  and Mira would be left in an orphanage  was this Well  thats much later  actually.
So they took him to hospital with a gendarmes or gestapo man sitting by his bed.
And as it happened  my when she came into our household  when I was born  my sister had her own nurse  and I from what I heard  I dont think they got along too well  and my parents decided on Lisbeth   who we called Tedde Tedde .
So I met that doctor  but he was in the woods  a partisani [indecipherable]  gynecogolist.
He said  \ It's not too many Jewish people that stay here  but Doctor Mengele (ph.)
Nobody knew I had been there until something had cropped up and the only people I spoke to were the chaps I knew who I used to write to and in hospital they told me  I had been in hospital for two months  which I didnt want as I wanted to do more time than my father did and when I left there I went to say goodbye to the staff nurse and she wished me good luck and said that when I went in there I was the most ill mannered pig she had ever met in her life and I looked at her in amazement and wondered in what way was I ill mannered?
I -- I -- at the time I was studying and then I had to start to work  thats why I -- I am not a doctor  because I couldnt work and so on.
My father was at work when I was born in the hospital.
One was a doctor  two of them  two of them were doctors.
And he had -- he had been in Sibe ria  and he said the only reason he survived was because he was a doctor and they needed him to take care of the prisoners.
I dont have to go to the doctor  he comes [indecipherable].
Her daughter was sick  and she was in hospital; and some her friend  they thought I am her daughter.
We had possibility of getti ng taken care of immediate by the American Red Cross hospital  field hospital  and I went with my friends  tried to go as far a possible west.
Because he is going every day in the hospital asking about my his son.
We had a friend who was that kind of doctor who dealt with this kind of injuries  except– he was a wonderful man  he was a friend  but he didnt know enough about the whole deal.
Somebody needs a ride to a doctor or something  if Im available  I I do it  but they do it for me also  you know?
If the son doesnt get to be a doctor  or a pharmacist  or anything else  and those kids were very unh appy.
And of course by then the occupying Nazi  Nazi forces the German army  knew who he was and they took him out of the hospital and took him to jail and he was shot there.
An interesting thing was that after the war whether it was with Peter or whether it was with this girl  Monica  that I mentioned  the daughter of the doctor  one couldn't talk the past with them.
Some -- it was a family  they si -- when things we re so bad it was -- I dont remember the name of these people  they have daughter my age and it was -- father was a doctor and his wife  they 40 decided to commit suicide  and th ey poisoned themself  including th e child over there.
Fortunately  the doctor in that isolation hospital was very thorough  and very smart.
It was a hospital very similar to  those who have seen the TV show and the movie  ﬁ M*A*S*H .ﬂ Field set -up  doctors work working Interview with Robert Max July 14  2015 117 under very  very difficult conditions  but providing great  great service to men wounded on the battlefield.
The first time Interview with Suzanne Foldes 71 I was talking about all that was in 1990 we were sitting in front of the operating room and his father was operated on at Georgetown University Hospital where I first talked to him about where I'd been.
Being in the service  you mean  or -- Well yes  but Im -- even in the hosp ital you see when youre -- when youre in training to be a nurse  youre pretty much in with a block of other nurses and you learn -- course most of us knew how to get along w ith other people  but I think being in that close proximity  you are more aware of it  maybe.
And the child has co ckroach  and they didn they didnt let me into the hospital  no place.
So I was coming out of depression and  but then  you know  my legs had swelled up terribly when I was in hospital  he had never caught it.
But somehow I survived  but it meant that I spent a lot of time in the hospital  but I started also th ey they were organizing the schools  which was sitting on the bricks in some hangar with the ho old airport  near Teheran was unused  so there were hangars  and we were sitting there  and the teacher was giving us lessons.
I had a job right away   I was -- I took a job as a baby nurse.
Because what the hospital  if I would just st ay in the hospital  they bi -- they get me to Germany.
There was one nurse who helped me on my feet  too.
And I as a nurse  was staying with Father and we were sleeping underground in the shelter  under the rocks.
I said  when he would come  a doctor  which is a military man  and I would suggest he will ask  is that your child?
>> Bill Benson: Once you recuperated enough to get out of the hospital  what did you do from there?
We had one in the hospital which was run by Franken where you could buy some stuff–\ ] Anthony: You mean Mr. Franken?
She couldn't go out from the car so in between was a doctor  one of her friends.
Just like many others  in one of the diaries I've translated for the museum  there's the story of a young woman  abou t 19 years old  who worked as a nurse apprentice in one of the psychiatric hospitals  and she was Jewish  and this was a Jewish hospital  and she started a correspondence with a girlfriend.
Once Zellinger received a letter from his wife through the guard that...uh...tomorrow a doctor will come asking for sick people.
She was probably in when she was in the hospital under Lebel.
But we moved to Detroit and I got a job as a Me dical Technologist at Mt. Carmel Mercy Hospital and he was a su rgeon there.
Doctor Plaut at that time was a man in his early 50s.
First of all there was maybe one or two cars and one of them was when our doctor from the next village.
A-And when I came back I was restless and didnt know what to do  so I went to work for the navy  the navy hospital in the as a pharmacist.
Well  before he could appear there  he got sick with -- with typhoid and diphtheria  was put in a hospital.
Another thing I was very happy to do  they would send the women from the town from Bergen to clean the hospital and we had this was the ballroom  it had a gorgeous parquet floor and we made them wash the floor twice a day.
So he got me a horse and wagon with a soldier  Russian soldiers  and without a stop that horse and wagon took me about 20 kilometers to the Hungarian border  to Red Cross  to you know  for hospital for Russian soldiers or some civilians.
In the hospital I had a patient  a Nazi industrialer  he was a private patient because he came to Brandenborg  because in Berlin were so ma ny bombs.
And -- and 10 years later  I became pregnant and I was very happy  but the doctor said that this child -- you're not going to go to bed any more.
It was a good  old German hospital and And how did you feel about being treated by Germans?
I always leaned toward being a doctor  and my father said  if thats what you want to be  thats fine  go ahead  lets -- but youve got to excel in school and -- and this was the time.
The doctor didnt take money; they didnt take money  I bought it  you know?
And otherwise  we three sisters were close because one stayed in New York  Hella and Richard Streicher with their children the -- my sister Risa and Felix Fleischner were here  they were only for a short time in Greenfield  but they came back because he got the j ob in the Beth Israel hospital  to be the head of the department  the [indecipherable] department .
And did then after I finished philosophy  I was sent to Rome to the University to study theology and...uh...to get a doctor degree in theology.
And I always said I will be a doctor  because this is also helping the chil...the people.
And when I went back to Vienna many years later  there was still a doctor living there.
So I went for therapy  and what I did is  I washed floors  I did everything to pay the doctor.
the Pols  and the jewish organization  the famous Doctor was there.
So a week before Johnny Mike was due  she got permission from her doctor in Arkansas to make the trip and she came from Fort Smith  Arkansas  to Blueridge Summit  Pennsylvania by train  on a troop train.
You know  it Interview with John Lang October 15  2010 37was it was sad news for me  but what was sad really was the saddest moment for me in England really was separation from my father  because at that point when when I was suppos ed to come to America  I was taken to the hospital.
And wh en it came to the selection  the doctor came  he had in front of him  all this 120  130 people and he selected.
Yeah  but when I came back -- Youd been in the service -- -- I came back it was  I think December 45 an d I had a 30 day fa -- furlough and then I had to go back to the hospital and they decided I was suffering -- besides the hearing I was suffering from arthritis for sleeping eight  nine months on the wet ground a nd the doctor had diagnosed it and they flew me to Hot Springs  Arkansas for 30 days to take the hot bath.
By the way came back very sick  I ga -- I got pneumonia.
Maybe they So they they converted the officers quarters into a hospital.
He gat hered some people  maybe the doctor that helped him or somebody.
But they came into Paris  they wanted to do something and we -- we -- we had to do something -- whatever we could  even if we didnt have supplies  so I organized this team of the Hightowns and Ruth Lambert  who was a French  Jewish nurse and Holtzer  Leon Holtzer  who was a Polish Jew  who had survived and was living in Paris.
Of course the sick ones they took right to the hospital .
The -- he was in charge of the medical military  I gue ss  otherwise too  I dont know  of the hospital  or hospital with an s in Vichy  Vichy  France  you know  where the government was?
Theyre -- there are nursery groups with children  in their nurse -- I mean  not knowing whats ahead of them.
Even when I was in the hospital  there was a answer.
We lived in the ghetto  even before the ghetto  they lived there too.
They tell me  yeah  there are some Jewish girls in the hospital.
And he called me on the phone and he called me when I came back from the hospital.
But anyway  thats the way it went  and when I came back  she -- he was born the 12 th of December  and Im superstitious  and I finally got to the hospital  it was like 30 minutes -- 11:30 or something  and I said to the nurse  ﬁI want to see the baby.ﬂ She said  ﬁTake your time.ﬂ And I said  ﬁIts getting close to midnight  it gonna be the 13 th ﬂ so I called the nurse and say you go -- she say  ﬁWhat are you crazy  sir?ﬂ I say I want to see the baby now  you know  about five minutes to midni ght  and I made it.
So your father was a doctor and he was able to be close to home?
So when  you know  every doctor have to do twelve  twenty four hour  depend on state.
I told her Im going there  but I brought her in because she -- when she saw me she said  Hannah  the doctor called me.
I woke up in a house  sort of this is a hospital .
I was the nurse of   you see  and because her her close connections with ...she she loved her.
I didn't see it but they were from the  they were on their way to  to the hospital.
Also  we took a list of uh people who were executed in uh...in Auschwitz--on the Block 11--with the signature of the  the top uh doctor  SS doctor.
They kept us there and they took us some  on in trucks  to hospital in Bamberg  which was couple hundred miles west  into West Germany.
We had one doctor in the village  and he was very good diagnostician  and he prescribed little ampules.
But  in the hospital itself  they were like long wooden -- they werent tents.
So again  it was chance  in some cases  people who had diarrhea were killed  were beaten to death  in some cases they got admitted to the hospital  so it was all kinds of inconsistencies.
She was a nurse in training  and in order to graduate  she they ha d to perform a social Interview with Susi Frank Annes October 4  2015 62 Service service.
And I would say  ﬁId rather not eat that.ﬂ And -- I mean  they just wouldnt take no for an answer  and my cousin  th-the doctor -- the husband  would say  ﬁYou are going to eat that ﬂ you know  and I would sit there  at her house  having dinn er  with this tears streaming down my eyes  trying to force this bloody mess down my throat.
The doctor was Dr. Teibers and everyone had a sufix in Yiddish.
But then we used to take even a hut or something like that  take out the dwelling...the...the citizens  the inmates and put in these...uh...under very strong and sometimes we used to put on the outlook on this...on this hiding... hiding hospital you see  uh...the outlook  two or three policemen...Jewish policemen on the outlook so if somebody comes close  near to it.
If you had to go to the hospital  he didn't come out from the hospital any more.
You couldnt ask -- you couldnt tell a doctor or anybody like this that you got hurt  or hurt you or something.
Why didnt our chief nurse put it in  or our -- our colonel?
CE: Probably  I didnt -- SE: When we came to -- when we came to Israel by boat and I went to my family -- to the doctor  where I told you I have -- Dr. Cohen  what lived in Appledon and they lived up the Carmel  a nicest spot in Haifa and he we nt to his family in Tel Aviv  in Yafou and there were all the immigrants what came ba ck  which was in 1950  I mean Israel was only two years old.
And there I took sick and I was in a hospital in Sankt Cecilien (?).
Morris' doctor ordered him to no longer go on his steep roof to clean the gutter and do repairs.
So she was fired by the obstetrician  and nine months later is when she gave birth to me  with the help of a nurse.
39--February--I am drafted into the Polish Army and sent to the border.
They take him in the – in the – in the hospital; whatever they had.
So from my understanding  after the war  you were first in a hospital for about five weeks in -- in the same area -- Bad Nauheim.
So  we would sleep -- it was so cold  but we would sleep  this Polish doctor  and Lisa and my mother and I would take one blanket and put it underneath us on the shavings and would cover ourselves with the three other blankets.
At that time there was a doctor there but there was nobody to take care of the dates.
Didn't know what I'm going to do in medicine but I like to be a doctor.
Well  it came '33 on January 1  -- I remember to this day  in January 1  1933 I was in the hospital of the University  the University Clinic of the University of recovering from an appendectomy when in the afternoon the Fuhrer's voice bellowed over the radio.
It was in suburbs of Warsaw  Je wish hospital for mentally ill.
When he came back for the second time from the turn and he was already laying  crying  I immediately took him to the hospital with calling the doctor.
And eventually the -- another historish -- historic movement -- mo-moment  I would say  after a -- a few weeks or a couple mo -- maybe -- maybe six weeks  showed up in sh -- in Pruzana a doctor  her name is Olla Goldfine  and she was a neighbor of mine.
Yeah  we began to see and I have somewhere in my file  I have a picture of a transport taken by a friend of my father's who was a doctor  too  from his office window which was just above the building where they took the people.
She ran out to get help  so we can go to a hospital.
And many people beaten  and the plantation had to be transferred to the so-called hospital in Dachau.
I dont know  she was very nice girl  and maybe she saved my life  Ill tell you  because I got mumps  and Russian doctor  they open the door  and they gave me in a glass I dont know  it was enclosed glass here  there was medication.
But eventually  they thought  why not bring a doctor down here?
Then the German doctor told me in German  don't eat so much because your stomach is not strong enough.
In May  1944  my mother  coming back on the train from visiting my brother Fred  my youngest brother who was sick  was -- she had managed to put in a hospital in the south of Holland.
And so my mother told me the women would go to the infirmary and tell the nurse that they were having their menstrual period and needed a wad of cotton.
So it was Dr. Mengele's  because even between the prisoners  there was some good doctors and they worked in this hospital.
And it turned out  and when I started talking to him  that he had been a pre-med student and therefore earned the title doctor.
Then they used to put you in a hospital  give you some care.
Anyway  the fa -- my son Eric was born in the socialist hospital.
Like I had to go to a doctor for a  for a angiogram report.
We only realized through that doctor who came  when we got the story how they were pushed from place to pl ace  that they were pushed to the east to be beyond any line which could presumab ly still remain under Russia.
Came back through our hospital for just a few hours 'cause we were still this li ttle tent in the field  and all very --had been wounded seriously and had --had very little care given.
You could kill me too  so they shot the doctor too.
So  he get married and then it was already I  my brother and Rachel  and the doctor  and the -- and the nun  and the girl wh at I met.
So you know  in Teheran I was in a hospital  I had malaria and my sister was in the hospital.
Sniffling) But Edith got violently ill  and she begged me to take her to a hospital.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0068 124And I remember a very beautiful thing happene d. There was a Catholic priest -- they have a priest and a rabbi and all at the Walter Reed Hospital  and this priest just start -- just happened to pass when I was sitting there  and I mean  I wasnt crying  but I was sitting in the corner waiting for some results.
02:34:00 All of a sudden on the day after a doctor an American doctor came in.
You said you were working at this hospital and then became a German soldiers home.
Dr. Veed-det that was living together so to speak with Rum-co f-ski because in the beginning   you remember  he lived in the hospital?
And that's when we -- you know  that's why a lot -- I want you to know a lot of kids when they see that  especially if their father is a doctor  they always offer that their father would take it off for me.
He can -- he can drive  but only locally  he has to go to the hospital that I drive her  you know.
But his doctor told him that his heart was not in a condition that he could do it.
I didnt re -- I knew that they were [indecipherable] the doctor there was hungar -- but I dont reme mber being in contact with too many Hungarian Jewish people there.
People started to leave from the hospital and then I was transferred to another smaller room.
And because she was quite ill with a...with a bone...some type of...uh... deficiency  that the doctor at the time...we did not have a hospital at that time there..he said  \ Isaac  you must stay here.ﬂ And in fact he even talked to our commanding officer  that I must stay there because they expected the worst from birth.
At any rate  in 1938 I would have been going only to the first grade anyhow  and between my hospital visits  I had a private tutor who taught me how to write and read.
I was then in and out of hospital and recovery places  and Im now home with my wife  but we had to decide that this home is too big and too difficult to keep for us  and in the next two months  well be moving to the hired USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0077 7residence on Connecticut Avenue  where we have a two bedroom and two bath apartment.
But  and the officers  I mean  when I was running when I was in military government  organizing and running that venereal disease hospital  a couple of officers from some nearby battalion  got in touch with my captain asking him to release a certain woman who was their girlfriend  or one of their girlfriends  I don't remember.
When the doctor told me I had diabetes  I did not belie ve him  I said  it must be somebody elses blood results  not mine.
And there was a doctor Primar Horn from Nihlava   and I told hi m all these messages which we had from this radio  yes  and he was interested I should tell him always  we knew when the prisoners came  the new prisoners  so the SS men told you will take these prisoners to  to a cell and we brought them their food but it was always in th e  we were guarded when we did by an SS man.
While I was in the hospital  I got a message that my cousin was killed in an accident in Munich.
That kept me from going getting back to America   because they couldnt they were going to fly me  which they did  I I flew in a hospital plane.
Ah  there were no doctors on  on  on  on  at the hospital  go ahead. [
We had given them uh little containers where they  you know  uh field kits and uh what the physicians were fighting the prisoners was that they took very small portions at first uh and I remember one scene where a medical officer  a captain whom I had seen because at one time I also had to interrogate prisoners in the field hospital where they were being treated  and uh I had seen him before and met him there again at uh Buchenwald and I had seen him at his  in the field hospital and he was one of those spit-and polish officers  despite the fact that he was a physician  but he was running that field hospital.
As I said  Doctor Kestenberg has seen me professionally as a therapist and that's been helpful to me.
In Maryland you could work as a physician in a hospital without having to take all the tests.
From there I used to go to the hospital to finish the course.
They went together to the Jewish Day School and hes a big doctor now.
And then we had  we were only 250 girl s and after a while they brought another 250 girls from another camp plus they brought a doctor to camp and they said whats going on.
And it was a pretty dead-end job and I was home sic k  suffering from a kidney stone  and about ready to go to the hospital when the call came in.
02:30:19 End of Tape #2 18 TAPE #3 03:00:49 You were describing to me the fact that there was this doctor.
Very few people did that because the rumor went if you're sick  they're going to liquidate you  so you didn't want to go to the doctor.
But didnt have much choice  had to learn in a hurry  because I got a job within a week as a lab technician at Mount Sinai Hospital.
So I would get home from work about 6:30 in the evening and my mother would have dinner already because where she worked in this nursing home and hospital  she would start at 7 o'clock so she would get home about...uh...3:30  4 o'clock.
We were used to hearing our tents being pulled down  cause the hospital was always moving.
>> Fanny Aizenberg: Well  I was twice in the hospital because I had inside germs.
But she was let go because she had a letter from a doctor that she had some phlebitis  and sometimes needed emergency help  which was true.
27And Rene  after liberation and the warehouse  what was your– R: The next recollection I have  I understand that I was in a hospital in Bratislava so I am told and I had some TB tuberculosis a touch of it.
And they made a hospital for us  and thats how we got out  I mean -- I remember the first day  that was the worst thing  I was practically in a coma  I was -- I didnt know what -- what -- I was imagining that I had killed the camp commander and had him hidden under my bed.
How many --how soon after you arrived in Auschwitz did you realize what was happening in the crematorium  in the camp?
And they had very good hospitals  very good hospitals  and the hospital care was great.
And while I was sitting here  asking the doctor told me that he remembered something about Blatt... Ledermann ...something  and later you walk in and you walk out and the doctor was running after you.\
And I told him  told -- the doctor said he needed an assistant.
Well she had a  we went to a doctor that we had known in Vienna  but they didn't have things for people like  you know  as they do now .
And so they took me to the hospital and they really didn't do anyt hing.
And that was my luck  because the people with the hospital group--nurses  uh sick people  everybody  doctors--they were taken direct in Auschwitz to the crematorium.
What happened was that my father arranged for my mother to go to the hospital and stay there  thinking that maybe the Germans will honor the doctors still there  like they did before.
At four a.m. I call my doctor at home  the chief of gastroenterology at Sloan-Kettering.
The hospital --the people --the hospital personnel was not expected to have an y emotion because you had to do all you could to help those who --who had --who were tr aumatized  and I don't think any of us were ever considered to be traumatized.
That mean the doctor himself--that French doctor  you know--he would be coming.
And -- and then the - the Soviet tanks wanted to shot into this hospital.
We had an inmate doctor there  an Slovakian doctor  under the name Anna Weiss.
They were sending people to another hospital  and mine husband was not there because he was -- they send him to a school someplace.
And i ndeed it was her family  and she said  ﬁYou know  I am the doctor  I was sent by Shanya Catz  and shes your relative.ﬂ And then they told him the whole story and what happened to them  and they came  and the address.
It was a plain man with a car  who made himself maternity -- and he took me to the hospital in the middle of the night.
Its near Dulles airport  th-they took an hour before he was in that hospital.
And I was -- I came then in touch with the foreign people  I was then staying with a cousin of mine and I came -- I dont know any more  how it all came about  I 128 came then in touch with a Dr. Da vis a -- a -- a -- a late doctor  in Stamford Hill and this -- this labor MP  the letter I got is in the documents  he wrote to me when -- when she has difficulty with me to get the working -- is very difficult to chern -- to -- to change a visitor permit into a working permit  when -- if she has difficulties  they should turn to him.
I think it was famous  thats how they called it Visola hospital and our factory was on beside  so it was like one next to the other and there was also a cemetery in back of our factory.
