One of thems living in Klaipda now  raising his family  thats he was Russian  yeah  ethnic Russian.
So I brought it over to the -- to the Russian intelligence  which we -- we worked together  and they had the plans  so they send out engineers and they -- and they did everything that it shouldnt be -- yeah  because when she gave me the plans  so she said to me -- she said to me -- so I said  ﬁI have to run ﬂ took the plan  because any minut e the columns will blow up.
I heard them uh the noise of uh branches until finally somebody told me from behind  hands up    and...in Russian  and went through my pockets.
This is when we were still living in the apartment to which we m oved during the Russian period.
Im appearing in their amateur hour and winning a prize doing my krazotsky and singing Russian songs.
And many of them  by the way  were able  because they were on the Russian front  able to either escape or were captured by the Russians.
And I opened the eyes  and there I saw a man with the sickle and the hammer  was a Russian soldier.
So we were on this side of the Oder; and we could see the Russian cannon on the other side of the Oder  you see.
Just so happened on this station  there -- there were -- the whole Russian contingent of soldiers were sitting around waiting for this train.
Ther e was one young Russian PW in Stutthof who broke down and took a hammer and smashed his German guard over the head with it.
They were sitting in the kitchen with their [indecipherable]  and there in the kitchen were also about four or five girls  uniforms  Russian officers  because they had a field hospital there  and with the fee -- and they were doctors in the field hospital  and we started to talk in between the -- the four or five girls  two of them were Jewish.
But I only know one thing  that on September 1  1943  there were only two thousand five hundred German Jews left and about the same amount of Russian Jews.
When the Russians came in of course any of the parochial schools  whether they were Christian or Jewish were closed and everybody had to attend the public school  which was Russian indoctrination.
There was a Russian prisoner who was driving that little train.
I remember there came Russian soldiers and they said  \ Y ou have good grades.
Now  I went out and dressed and went out in the street there was Russian troops are marching from all states--everywhere.
That wa s after the Russian put the Sputnik and Kennedy put money  you know -- Right. -- \
So  I stayed in that town until when Germany invaded the Russian part of Poland after they had that pact.
And I said  ﬁThis is my sister ﬂ in Russian  ﬁRosa  who was born  and you write down -- and give me a piece of paper that she was born this day  my mother told me.ﬂ He looked at me  everybody was laughing that I  a little child 10 years old  go register my sister.
And as it happened  she said yes  here  go to that place  and my mother knew a little bit of Russian  so she could converse.
In the Russian occupied part they couldnt progress like this we could make in the Austro-Hungarian or in the German occupied territory.
Since all the applicants for permission to go home were not Poles -- they were Russian and Ukrainian  and all  all other people and all nationalities.
It was for his bravery fighting in the in the with the Polish and Russian troops.
On the way  we saw so many Russian soldiers and we were young girls so it was a very dangerous  dangerous way for us to travel.
I recall when I came to the United States at -- at the age 16  well  I spoke Yiddish  I spoke Hebrew  I spoke Russian  Germa n  Lithuanian  studied Latin and failed.
So that's basically -- I didn't start -- when the Soviets occupied the Bukovina  when it was annexed  wasn't occupied  they would like to say it was annexed  in 1940  I started school  in Russian school.
And so the Russian Cossacks on horses on the highway  shooting apple off th e trees  and all that.
Before the Russian occupation  you mentioned in the first interview that you had been attending school and that you had dreams of becoming a professional and -- tell me a little bit more about your -- your educational experi ence and your hopes before the war began.
We were only 15 or 20 miles from the Russian frontier  and our aim was to wait until the...the water will freeze over and maybe we will cross the frontier.
I read   and other people have read   accounts on the Russian assault on Berlin and what life was like as they came into Berlin and what life was like in that devastated city in the months after the war.
So my husband  who again  had a lot of freedom in Magdeburg and the camp  knew some Russian women who were wo rking in polter too.
I told I told them  I never thought I would see a bunch of American millionaires scared of a Russian peasant.
The Russian po-- the local population  the Ukrainians  they ran away.
One of the unfortunate things that happened there was that one of the Russian bombs hit the building that we were in and probably fifteen or so of us were killed.
And they were in a hunting lodge in the Bohemian forest  just halfway between the border and Pilgrin  and they were interrogating German -- I mean  Russian PW  who had information of a strategic nature  like we were doing on our side.
I had a uniform  I had a railroad uniform on but not a Russian soldier uniform and behind the tank I just passed  they didnt mind me they only wanted the soldiers and they didnt do anything to me.
There were the British line  there were the Russian line you name it  there was somebody.
ﬂ I said  ﬁAt least I can do for you that you don t get punished  or put in jail  or anything like that.ﬂ So what I did is I -- I still wrote Russian at that time  I sat down  and in no time I wrote him a letter.
3 Not much  we -- we didnt know whats -- wh ats gonna happen  and we just be -- a lot of people were running to -- running away with the -- with the Russian back  and we didnt.
We spoke German at home  and Russian  and Latvian and when they wanted to speak so that we wouldn't understand it  they also spoke English.
It was on the Russian side of the divided Poland  from the -- after ‚39.
So that he had occasion to go to all the Russian -- to Czechoslovakia  to some of the other Russian countries  whatever  and learn how to run a -- an 36 outs -- what I would call a hotel that caters to dignitaries.
P -- in Poland was 10 percent Jewish people  three percent was Evangelic and German  and couple percent was Gypsy  you know  couple percent was Ukrainian  and also was the Belarusian -- Belarus -- white Russian  you see?
We hear everything  and I today I forgot but I know something in Russian  in German.
No  no  no  you asking about Russian  no  no  they had some part divided between Germany and government guber guber gubern-nament .
Those that were deported or ran with the Russian Army whether the Germans attacked  about 80% -- about 90% survived.
The last few days that we were in the ghetto Russian bombs fell in our city of Siaulai.
For instance  you had to go through the Russian -- Russians were in Czechoslovakia  first of all important -- and we wanted to go over to the British side or the American side was much further.
It belonged to some kind of a Nazi  and the Russian to...to go there and to just to find a place.
And they three people; a Russian  a Lithuanian and a Jew are are this this group  this Police  yeah.
And was the feeling specially in end of '42 when we know  people know that the war will be lost b y Germany  there's anyway  the Russian or American will come and liberate and Germany will leave.
So the Polish boys jumped from the window because they were downstairs  and they ran to the Russian commandantura to tell them that th e ru -- there are Germans in the house.
In Germany  they started doing that  but not to the Russian soldiers when they came to Poland  they didn't do anything to us.
You were  you were  you told the story in the first interview about how you went away to the Russian front.
Russian Jewish  I dont know  from Russian group  she came later.
That mean we should make more lines  that they should come more fast in fast over to go to the Russian border to  to Russia.
So I was on the highway and I stay and I wasn't German  and I say  ﬁHey  why you running so fast?ﬂ So he say  ﬁFast  fast  Ivan come!ﬂ And the Russian coming  this was the liberation.
With -- you ste pped out from the basin  and they gave us a Russian military [indecipherable] uniforms  summer uniforms  summer  with under -- long underwear  Russian military -- a little girl  and a -- a -- a shirt  an unde rshirt  and then we had to take care the pants wouldnt fell down  so we had to bind them somehow here and so and turn and turn and turn and fix up.
And mine daughter went there when they interview some college professor  they said theyre going to teach in the school  go and make a remark how they treat them after the war  they got red in the face  and they start  ﬁOh  Poles was killed  too  the Russian killed  too.ﬂ They wouldnt say -- apologize even  no.
You were special because your father got a year long trial  and afterwards  he wasnt shot by a Russian in the war  or by a French  or an English  but he was hanged  so that was special.
But Mother's idea was  she knew at that point from the news from the Russian Army that they were squeezing Germany from both sides and all she wanted was to get out of Poland.
With them we found some others a nd eventually were liberated by the Russian Army.
So the Polacks were afraid  so they were quiet  and the White Russian didnt say anything because they wanted to become higher and higher.
I mean  there was probably a foot and a half difference between he and the officer  but he grabbed the horsewhip  and started horsewhipping the the Russian.
So that was Berlin and that was the camp at Schlattensee and that was the camp at Templehof  and then the trick always was to organize trainloads to go out of Berlin southward through the Russian zone and come down to Frankfurt which was in the American zone  and go into one of the 64 permanent camps that were in the American zone and there catch your breath and sort out whom you wanted to send further south to the Mediterranean to the French and Italian Riviera  both of them  where the Haganah ships came in to take the people who were willing to run the risk of the British gauntlet and most of whom were caught out on the high seas in contravention of international law  it didn't make any difference.
And now it comes out  I think  the only reason he dated me  he was majoring in Russian.
And like if the mother would wouldnt want you send the child to school  Russian school  then she will be arrested and put there.
Anyhow  he escaped to the Russian side  and while my mother decided to stay because family ties  brothers  her parents and so on.
The Ger...the Russian front was advancing and uh and uh they were not in our town but they were someplace in in eastern Poland  but anyway they were close enough and as you may know the Russian advances were kind of .
So we say you  ﬁOh  oh  something's wrong.ﬂ and before you -- yes -- before you know  it was already alarm  fleet alarm the bomb  the American flyers coming and the Russian coming at night  American day.
We don't know who  whether it the Germans or whether this is the American  or the Russian  we don't know.
The levels were occupied by different  they were Russian prisoners  French prisone rs  and we were on the top and there was a rail going up and one of the privileged prisoners controlled the brakes  that is he let the full lorries go down to the valley and brought an empty one up and we had to fill each lorry with  what  12 lorries a day or we would get no food  and we -- the rail for the lorries then from the brake station were then two of the different niches where the prisoners worked  so I had this and another one had this and so on.
indecipherable] evacuate from the Russian front  cause the Russians were coming  they were close by apparently  an d they wanted to get us away from the Russians.
And from the Russian point of view it was very nice [indecipherable] let us come in  as a matter of fact  for approximately two months  it -- borders were opening  everybody who came  who could -- who took advantage  and cou -- and came  survived.
Papers to stay there  in in the Russian zone you just dont come in and and and live there.
In Belcy  I met a friend from my home town  and this was in Russian control.
That time this was 1940  I think  when the Russian made a Hitler make a pact with Stalin  they not gonna go to war any more  they go not gonna fight.
In Russia ﬂ he says  ﬁthe government dictates what the people should do  and in Poland  the gover -- the people dictate  not the ﬂ -- which we all almost laughed  they were under Russian regime  and -- but we felt  how can they even say that  not being afraid to say it  but they probably felt nobodys going to go tell the Russians what they said.
We also built barbed -- barriors across the road that were suppose to stop the Russian army from advancing.
And there was letter P for Pole  R for Russian  you know.
I wonder though that kind of being around death all the time -- you've just described a little bit ago about seeing the Russian soldiers and the German soldiers and you must have seen many bodies in the camps.
Now  my mother happened to come from the Russian quoteunquote zone.
But in the first years when it wa s Lithuanian  the main language was Russian  because the population was not Lithuanian  the Lit huanian was otherwise.
Now I realized that it must have been fermented  and we both got drunk on it  on those black berries and we fall asleep and maybe that's what helped knock down with all the medication that we got  and they took us to a Russian hospital and they shaved our head  because it was all full of thing.
Also after invasion of the Russian on June 22  1941  I dont know exactly.
I said  I survived in the partisans with the Russian army.
And he told me that just before the pulcrum erupted a Russian officer came to him and he was from the Cossack brigade and told him that you come with him and take his family.
So when finally -- the Russian front and Russian Army did approach the area  the German guards disappeared from their guard towers and cautiously watched to see if that was for real or whether they will come back.
There was the president of the camp  people were in charge of cultural affairs  they started to have  some people started to come uh that were in hiding or in the Russian occupied areas  and they had some little children  schools were organized and uh  different organizations  uh-uh  Zionist organizations.
I I speak fluently because I have kwa I was communicated with the with the Russian people.
And he had a partner because his diploma– I have still his Russian diploma  was not certificated  so he had an American partner.
13 Located on the Black Sea  very near the border between the Russian S.F.S.R. and Georgia.
Now  if you want to go to hell  that's where you went  the Russian front.
Is that where you met the Russian sergeant who gave you this document?
My aunt Rose  very sick  but she did make it until the Russian Army did come and did open up the big gate.
phone rings) Well the daughter called the Russian that she walked out  that she was going with and that she was  he was  called him or whatever.
But we went as far as to the Russian border  one kilometer.
And one time a Russian soldier motioning at me to come to him  and he want to tell me something.
When the Russian took over Proushinna  they build a big airport -- right outside from Proushinna.
And the partisans gathered the leftover Germans  the leftover Russian people who wanted to turn into Germans and work for the German government and they were mean to everybody.
We had -- we had a -- we had a m-meetings -- we used to had a meeting and each  you know  from the group  each one worked in different kind of locations and one of our group worked in the warehouses where there were -- you know  there was 50 or 100 people working there  or one or two people from our group worked in the warehouses  where was the Russian leftover.
The Russian  Americans  they don't let them breathe; 24 hours a day  every da y 2 o'clock in the morning  you can see for yourself the lights.
The Russian came with the same food the Army ate : bacon  meet meat  potatoes  sauerkraut.
I didn't know Polish  of course  because then Russian became my first language.
So it was a very long interrogation in German  Hungarian  Russian  Czech  whatever else before I was accepted by the leadership by the resistance organization.
They have been they told us in Russian [speaks Russian] So I What did they ask you  to write something?
They said no  they had been forced to do that and in certain briefs...I saw that just recently again...they even trie d to sell  to tell what a kind of a sanitorium it was they had created for us in in Au schwitz  and another interesting facet of that which 52 their lawyers found that if they ha dn't uh taken us as slaves in in Auschwitz  then we under normal conditions probably would have to go to the Russian front and could have been killed there easily so I say this is something which is is unbelievable.
She want me to Germany and the Russian was beginning '43 and the Russian was coming.
Even though my first language was Russian -- well  as you know  we had a very diverse family with my parents being born in the Ukraine and my siblings in Persia and I was born in Belgium.
It is it is not Interview with Yehuda Adam 9 and after  I mean  June 1941 when the Russian  the Barbarossa started up  they said  well  it could happen maybe in Russia  but it's never happen in H ungary.
He started to make fire and the whole night and over ther e was Jewish doctors too because they came from Russian also...a Jewish doctor and she t ook care of the baby and he had bronchitis.
We went to Bratislava which was just recently liberated from Russian domination and we went to the opera.
The war was -- the Russian came already in '44 till the Weichsel -- there was six months no fi-- no fighting in this side.
As I said  it had been u nder Russian influence  and now it seems to be  you know  a -- a -- a great place to live now.
And the of course  the whole train was surrounded by Russian soldiers with rifles  so there was no way to get in or get on of the train.
Then later on in the Slovak  they even the people Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 7  1997 28did realize  it was like  in the beginning like secret  but then they started to bring back injured or dead soldie rs  then the Slovak people started to know that the actually the Slovak army is in the war against the Poland and Russian.
When you see what ha ppens in Russian where they have no food  and they stay in line for hours  and get no food.
They had horse and wagons and stuff like that  and they were all going west running away from the Russians  but then at one point  we decided  all ten of us  we had one Russian girl  not Jewish  with us  too.
He need them for the archives  because of the communists run away and left behind him so many papers  so many archives  in the Russian language  and the Jews knew Russian language perfect  that the Jews should go and help the -- how to take 31 out the paper and check them  and then know wh at's all about them in the paper.
HELEN FAGIN Page 4 German or Czech or Polish or Russian and they could always find somebody who could be the translator for us.
He ran away after Russian revolution to Burma  and then he crossed to India.
We recognized it immediately and all this   but just to give you one example  most of us  we had to go to Russian instruction every day  most of us either didn't show up or if we did  we didn't listen  we didn't learn anything  and after goi ng through college  at the end you had to take a state exam.
There was a lot of Russian soldiers in that area  and he took us to... uh...Danzig  and left me at the hospital and she told me  \ Tell them you are deaf and dumb and you can't... and you can't and you don't understand a word they're saying.
And I went to my Russian exam  and this happened to other people too  and I drew my topic and I couldn't even read the title  let alone  couldn't read the title  I just  in these years I just never bothered to read  to learn enough to read.
Yo-You had said before that on the train  the Russian guards on the train were nicer than the Russians that you met in Russia.
Yes  probably the Russians  the Russians wouldnt let us out becau se was already the city was divided into  into French  English  Russian and American.
We supposedly don't understand Russian because otherwise would have been a bad deal.
We was in the woods  came in  the Russian on a horse  on the horses.
They translated from other languages books and they had in this Tecuci place  they had a huge book store that went like several  all the way  ha d to go up on ladders to  and they had translated from French and English and even Russian books and they were kind of cheap.
A. Oh  about a week before we actually were lib erated the farmer came very excited that the Russian front is very nearby and we actually heard artillery nearby and he said that it's a question of days or weeks before the whole front will coll apse.
We were...on our...we were traveling with this...with this buggy  and the Russian...the Russian took us on our horse  so we were actually walking and we stopped in a house.
They occupied the city...this little town  and one of the Russian soldiers took a rifle and shot a...a German guard  took off his shoes and gave me his boots because the Germans had said if they were very well dressed  and without hesitation.
And I remember sitting in  behind a bush  crouched with my arms up in the air as this Russian was standing in front of us  not knowing -- with a tommy gun -- not knowing what to do.
So the Russian driver which was taking said  ﬁYou yes  you can go.
There were the Russian  a couple of Russian officers came in with vodka and caviar and everything you can imagine.
There the Russians were there pretty close so we came there it started snowing already and we came there on top of the mountain *Prashiva[[p h985] is the name of this mount ain and the Russians sent home the Slovakian soldiers  they didn't have confidence in them and only th ey kept the POWs or groups like we that we couldn't go hom e. We were there a coup le of days on this mount ain and then they said they will go east to try to join the Russian army.
Like   my two brothers ended up in the Ukraine  on the Russian front.
I never seen such hatreds during the war with the Russian like I encountered in Poland.
But Americans would have given her a Russian visa right away to come to America  because there was no quota number from Russia  but my mother wouldnt let be put that she was born in Russia  because may be a Russian.
He didnt know that I am I am in in the Russian army  and Prather ca utioned me against that  he said  dont tell him that you are in the army  because then he is not going to do that  and then he is not going to help you.
Do I know Polish  yes of course  I'm Polish  I know some Russian.
Because we were supposedly going as inmates from concentration camps  and we had no reason to know Russian.
But the sentence that came out  Polish words but they came out in Russian  you understand?
He jumped on this crisscrossing of this lot  and asks of this commander  ﬁWhere you want to go?ﬂ And he said  ﬁWe want to go there  and there.ﬂ So [indecipherable] like aragu -- you like be in the Russian [indecipherable] yes?
And right away  this guy wanted to say that - that he saved a Jew  but Adrian didnt pay attention to it  but the Russian - the wors t part was that the Russian  when he saw him  he said  ﬁTell me your st ory.ﬂ So  Adrian tells him the story  and he says he was in the Peoples Army.
There was no authority  no Russian authority di recting us anyplace  no Czechoslovak authority directing us anyplace.
We have to go to Russian schools  which was fine but -- if they sp oke Russian but we can't know the alphabet.
And the State Department at that time did not have a good Russian language program so I was made an exception and I was sent to CIA which had a marvelous program.
He related how Russian soldiers and officers were executed by the hundreds and hundreds.
Later we found out that we were walking between the American and the Russian front.
So  the very eastern part of Czechoslovakia was very close to Russia   and thats why it was so  later on  during World War II  Czechoslovakia Czechoslovakia was ceded to the Russian sphere of influence.
Poles were not there  but there were -- they had a group of Russian prisoners of war which turned on the Russians.
It didn't happen until January the 17  when the Russian offensive took on again.
You know  I remember people were worrying about food supplies and sugar and so on  because they were afraid that the Russian soldiers were buying things up and shipping home.
Polish citizens were drafted in the Russian army  and they escaped.
Later  with the Russian -- in the beginning  they were fighting together with the Russian  the Bielskis.
Bu t a friend of mine came to the typhoid barracks two days later  when I became conscious and she brought me a piece of  sort of a slice of white bread which the Russian army had brought in for us.
They were talking about that the Russian released some papers  way after the war  maybe four or five years ago.
We were invited to the Russian parade which was across the river.
The only tr ains that went back to Poland were the Russian convoys  with the rush -- Russian nationals  becau se there was a secret agreement at Yalta between the heads of states  that all the western heads of states relinquish the rights to Russian nationals  and will turn them over to the -- to the Russian authorities.
But Russian soldiers  Soviet Union soldiers were marching through the forest where I was dying  actually.
This was -- in that park some trenches had b een dug  presumably the -- the Russian and Latvian defenders expected to fight s -- s -- s -- block by block  so to speak.
Once you know how to speak the Slovak language  you can understand Polish  too  so I understood a little Russian  a little Polish.
The Russian front is coming near because our side only the Russians could have come because that was east.
You have lived under Russian occupatio n. How did you feel about the -- in the early 50s when the -- the fear and the hatred really  of Communism was very great in this country?
At that time  they took the Polish woman away  there was my friend Alena  Doctor and Doctor Annie  the Russian woman  who didn't know much about medicine  but she was there.
The other one was  I guess  either Russian Jewish or Polish Jewish or whatever.
He was there in the Russian army  which at th at time was stationed in some of the cities in...in...in Manchuria  which was part of China.
there was a situation when Sikorski met with Stalin and all the other big brass  Russian brass in in in Moscow   I think  and he asked about  where are the Polish officers?
In that particular apartment was also a Russian judge  military judge  his name  I remember his name because it was such a romantic kind of name  Ivan Ivanovitch Ivanov  that was his name and he had a daughter named Luba  which means love  she taught me Russian  and he lived upstairs from us  he also had a son  and his son and I jointly had a stamp collection.
My my I think it was second my when army Russian army was coming closer and closer  therefore all the concentration camp  they is trying to go to west.
And they took us there  and there were some Russian girls  white Russian girls  they were playing the piano.
And then the really enormous increase came after the Russian front.
I: Aside from standing in line  were you aware of any abuses from the Russian soldiers?
Then we f -- about a week before the end of war  we heard that American troops had -- were within -- within about 50 kilomete rs of Kometau where we lived  and the Russian troops were still 300 kilometers away  and we knew nothing of the Yalta agreement.
So u h when uh the situation become worse and worse on the eastern front  Russian front  Zionists start to come back  and many wounded soldiers come back.
And the artillery  the heavy artillery  they used to I say I ask him I knew Russian  because I was in school two years.
You see  there's all kinds...there's there's field commander officers wh at they're fighting and to fight on the front  in the Russian front  you didn't last more than a week or two.
Q. And Ruth  in testimony  once mentioned a Russian girl Clara.
44 Oh  I remember that because when -- then Russian grab my father and maybe few hours later  we had just period that nobody was in.
But they were like behind the Russian armies who they kept an eye on them  actually.
If it was dark bread  it was Russian s. If it was white bread  the W estern powers.
The Russian s stood with the rifles  and the Polish with the rifles.
And then  sometimes when on the road  it came airplanes  either Russian or the Allies and they bombard and the German would hide under the tr ains.
That man that was goi ng to report her  got killed by the first Russian bombs when the Russians started to invade Budapest.
I wonder sometimes what their fate was  if they were ru were Russian  probably a bad fate.
And 1939 I was in Polish army  I know the Russian army  and I know the German army going from the east to Wa rsaw.
There was I would say about 20 % Catholics and 80% was Russian Orthodox.
So you get there in September  and you leave Interview with Maurice Friedberg August 12  2009 14 And we left next spring  when the the Russian authorities asked all the refugees who came from the other side  who expresse d their preference  the preferences being to remain a Soviet citizen and stay at Tarnopol  or to go back to the places from which they were ejected by the Nazis  which is what we chose to do  because thats where most of the family was  in Rzeszow   and some even in Jaroslaw  because not all of us were deported of the same day.
And then we learned  it was a few days later  there was a big fence between the Russian and the German Jewish ghe tto.
And -- so Margaret's father went up to him and introduced himself and told him that -- that we are Jews  whether -- that's the first Russian word that I learned  Jew means Yvrai in -- in Russian.
So she got us smuggled out by Russian guard s in crates of china.
When there were already Russian Jews came  the Russian transport came already and also the Polish Jews; and we had to walk around and sing  Russian and Polish songs  and German songs.
In this time when it become the war prisoners  Russian war prisoners  run away from the...from them...from the Germans.
One day in the woods they found a Russian soldier was hiding out and they stabbed him.
Because when the Russian came in  I was [indecipherable] the whole summer in Mlynov  and then I came back for another month maybe  or two  I dont its very hard to remember this.
So I came back to the camp  and 16 they put...Polkovnik came to visit one time...this is during the Russian.
speaks Russian here] A Russian folk song  the -- the Volga -- the Volga boatman song  some partisan songs.
Very often I heard those stories that they separated small children from their Interview with Danguole Gabis December 10  2015 76 parents  and some of these very tiny children were given away to Russian families to raise.
And a Jewish officer  Russian officer came over and was talking to me  so  are you Jewish?
They give me Polish uh uniform  because I was always in the Russian uniform.
Between those soldiers was an officer  and he wanted to marry -- >> Bill Benson: These were Russian soldiers?
Only when the Russi an came  it wa I I was from 19 I I knew Polish good  but Russian  I didn't learn Russian because I hated communism.
And I think the Russian so ldiers that helped me and were helpful  I think were c-caught on the eastern part of Berlin  which the Russian came in on.
How did it end up working out that -- The Russian and the Jewish partisan?
But we were very experienced personnel  for example  uh  we had requisitioned a ton of captured German cigarettes  and we used that to pay the Polish displaced persons who would man our two uh diesel trucks that we carried food  and uh  we had a young man who was the son of a Czech family promi nently in the steel business  uh who uh was edu-  who was brought up with a Scotch nanny and he spoke impeccable English  spoke uh Polish  Russian  German  whatever.
You know  when the Russians came in  and finally I we went out and had this empty apartment  I met a Russian high ranked officer on the street  who said to the first thing he said to me is  wher e is your papa?
One  that my mother and myself  we were able to get the Russian passports -- acceptable Russian passports.
This was the time when the front was nearing  of course  because we were moved to Auschwitz from the ghetto to  at the time when the Russian fo rces were already close to Warsaw  but the front didnt move until later on in the fall  a nd for this reason  you know  we remained in Auschwitz.
It was the to -- different schools it we -- I attend to the fi -- first -- first of all he ask me which language I prefer  Russian or German  because it was [indecipherable] I preferred German.
Even though it was a munitions factory  it was not bombed by American or Russian --?
And my father remembered the Germans Austro-German from World War I. Then the next day  or days later  he took a wa gon with horses  and he put this all  everything of of ours on the wagon  and we head to the Russian border.
So  chof-socks and leather coats and our fine porcelain  all of it went somewhere with the Russian families eventually back to Russia.
20 So your father and your uncle are marching– But had they stayed in that camp they would have been liberated by the Russians and the Russian camp would probably be be tter than the death camp so it would have been a better deal.
He left Poland at a very young age to evade the Russian slash Polish army  service in the army.
All the functionaries of the Russian government and Party had their trucks and their buses and other means of transportation stacked away somewhere.
As a result  plus that the Russian army had a huge overwhelming victory in January of 1943  where the Hungarian army was at the Danube  large river in Ukraine.
When you we re with these -- the Russians  and youre sleeping on the tables  and the Russian soldiers are sleeping on the floor  I mean  were you then free?
Into Russian occupied territory  and then the Russians  our Russian allies are re quested to be helpful to him in every way possible.
We heard about Babiy Yar  which of course on Russian territory.
There were two people  two Oriental people from the Russian army  I came across there.
And then in 39  Poland was divided  and Wiln a start to be Russian  and wars -- and Warsaw is Poland.
In Poland  the Russians were not very great in organizing the -- and helping these surviving people from the camps and a lot of those who actually were liberated under the Russian occupation zone  died from negl ect and not -- not improper care  whereas in the American sector  they -- they were more organized and they didnt allow these half-starved people all of a sudden to be given full meals and just any amount of it  in order not to overwhelm their system and -- and not die from overeating or whatever.
Early in the war you and your family lived under Russian occupation.
Two hundred Russian divisions are on border  we have to defend ourselves and ha ve to go into the  the Soviet Union.
So one of my friend  Moishe Taub   he was in the Russian army too  and he was in another group  from nervous keit  he took and he shot he gave a shot in the house with with the rifle.
So tell me about this document  when did y -- how did you -- This document helped me to get from the Polis h -- through the Polish zone  to the -- it was the Russian zone  and then into the American zone.
So  fo r example  the prisoners of war who had been killed  are not recognized the victims of the war to that kind of some kind of the defense that Russian would  after finally admitting that it was Russians  at first they said th-the the German forces came with the po the Russian prisoners of war who are in Russia.
There was a guard watching the area where the buildings where we were actually housed  Russian stayed there and people who worked for them.
Once -- the demeanor of the Russian soldier is very difficult to describe now because we see them now after all these years of changes  these were people who were fighting the war.
Q. Can you tell us when in   when the Russian army approached  what happened?
So that's when we saw a lot of Russian people there.
And I had a bunch of first of all  in the in the army  the Russian army I was paid as a officer  I received a certain amount of money in Russian rubles  and then a double amount in German occupational marks.
There was a Russian soldier holding me  and the rain were the tears from the -- his eyes.
No so they came from the Russian side  the Russians came.
And  we were able to exchange some of it into Rubles  but there were price controls in the Russian period.
Then all of a sudden  the Russian is not far away.
Little by little they start to come from the counties after the wa r. After the war for a long time  Vilnius was Lithuanian but the main language was Russian.
she she sees one and she she star ted t-telling my mother my mother spoke Russian  because she was through through a couple  in German and and Russian occupations.
And after we got th ose two Russian girls and they occupied Interview with Eva Kristine Belfoure February 2  2001 81those two rooms under the roof  I didn't have a place to stay  so the old Mrs. Ratzfeldt said I could live in the room where her son used to live.
She was a doctor in the Russian army  and there was a certificate for Palestine for her at the British consulate  could we help her?
HK Well  we never expected that we would be attacked by the German army because the Russian army was powerful and we never knew that what would happen.
He knew if he gives up that position to be lagerfuhrer  he will have to go to the Russian front.
And then we heard th at the Russian are coming  and we went back to Krakow .
I spoke Yiddish  I spoke Czech  Russian  Hungarian and of course I understood Polish  or a -- I also spoke German  you know  and that helped a lot because a -- when a -- in that part of -- a lot of the -- in that town  I should say  there were a lot of ethnic eastern Europeans.
They would keep them three months  and after that  they will  each one wa s killed always  and before they would kill them  they would kill them  they would beat them terribly  and they  they died terrible deaths  so I really was just lucky that I had uh  the  for  I mean that I had the idea of  of running away  so and but then later on there was um  the blockeldest told us uh  ev entually that the selections were more often always  and um  and then  there was not anymore going to be any selections  they were just emptying the Auschwitz because the uh front  they were losing on the Russian front  and they were   get  the Russians were getting closer  so they would take uh some camps they would take on death marches  some they would take to the gas cham ber  some  and  and  some ways they  they  of course  didn't want that there should be any witne sses  so they were trying to kill them uh  in any way they designed.
We said oh  they are coming  they are coming to murder us  and then we heard Russian language and this was the fighting unit.
No  its ju -- so  I stayed here -- I slept there and eventually we -- you know  they was -- came in -- the Russian took over this -- after a couple weeks  the Russian took over the city and I was still in -- in Proushinna and my job was that Im to try and get all 67 - mostly identify all the collaborators.
I said  because the Polacks is sh har killing Jews and the Russian.
Kolbasa is the Russian term for salami  for kilbasi   you know  and he brought a piece of bread and uh...terrific delicacy for us.
In eastern Hungary near–it was very in teresting because it was fifty kilometers from Russian  fifty kilometers from C zechoslovakia  from Poland  from Romania -- everything is very close to this– Except Budapest.
He had the sister and the brother  and his sister was killed in the ge -- during action in the ghetto in Lvov  and his brother  1941  the -- when the Russian a-army retreated from Lvov east  he -- he joined the Russian army  and we never heard from him.
My father was born in Ru ssia and he was a Russian citizen at one time.
But the Russian forces that came so rapid-rapidly they advanced they had to pull out fast.
And we -- we sh -- sought shelter  and we stayed with people  and I must say  in the Russian -- wh at is now the Russian -- what used to be the 113 Russian zone  East Germany  people were much nicer to us.
But then on June 21  when the Germans invaded the Russian part -- Q. 1941?
They instead Russian attack attack all the time  but they some somehow a group of Germans start attack sho attack the Interview with Noah Roitman April 8  1999 78Russian art infantry.
My mother instructed me at this point to tell it was run by a priest  to tell him that I was an Orthodox Russian.
And then  with a group of hundreds of other Jews  they took me on the mountains in a former Russian caserne  a military unit.
Raoul never left  so he was not a spy  but the Russians took it in their head that he was an American spy  and also they didn't like the Jews more than the Nazis  so why this spy goes to Hungary to save the Jews--this was to save  uh  so  we don't know  as Mr. Wiesenthal said  \ The Russian mind--the Soviet mind \  he said that time  \ is  is  is something you don't know what they thinking.\
It took me a whole year till  from the hospital till the support  ti ll I was given the so- called clean bill of health and I was...be cause Vienna was then under the Russian and I was...a Russian citize n: they gave me papers to go back to Vienna.
Well  during the war  there was a dirty old -- dirty old  well  he was -- looked old  he was in his probably late 20s or early 30s -- Russian hiding with us for man -- I mean  for weeks and months  at times.
So once when we did walk  once a day we did walk  I've seen a Russian officer and I recognize  say he must be Jewish and I stepped out from the walking pattern and told him  \ Listen I'm sitting here so long and I'm Jewish and I know it.\
Then  I started in Switzerland  and I had a hard time because I was having to study in French and I had studied English and German before and Russian but very little French.
You know the Russian authorities at that time  most of the occupiers.
You have German older people  I'm not talking about the young fellow  I'm talking about the older guards  older guys  maybe they were afraid to go to the Russian front  maybe they - --------  I don't know  I know when they came into th e tailor shop  let's say he needs to put on a button for him  okay.
And I would like to tell you  maybe  small story with three Russian officers.
He hitchhiked on wagons  Russian convoys  and finally made it back to the ghetto.
I find out that my girlfriend which I liked...her mother is gravely ill and she was only with her mother because her father and brother and si ster were on the Russian side.
But Georgine was shipped to a Russian camp from Auschwitz .
And we came to the village and we saw Russian soldiers around you  and in we want to be closer to the soldiers.
How would y ou characterize the American program?ﬂ He said  ﬁOur program is just as methodical  if not more so than the Russian.
And what happened is is that they liked me very much the Russian soldiers  and the Polish soldiers came  and there came some fliers from Stettlin  and they would bring liquor and so on.
But she lives here a long  long time  and her mother was Russian.
Interview with Adam Szymel January 25  2015 21 Did so your mother spoke Russian.
So this was the only school  and it became -- it was no longer 39segregated and they admitted boys  so we ha d boy and girl -- boys and girls  but it was taught in Polish  except that we had two hours of Russian every day.
So I said to my boss I will only go if you will tell him the truth  that I am not ethnic German but I am a Pole  and if he wants to take the risks  because as well as for the Germans  if they are caught they were sent to the Russian front.
I went over to the Elbe River and there was a Russian commander and I wanted to go across the river because the Americans were on the other side.
And we spent the two years  we were there during the airlift and the Russian blockade.
I mean  it was extremely interesting  but -- and by that time students were coming in and graduate students mostly from -- from Yugoslavia to Russian  so I was -- I thought it was interesting  but it wasnt fast enough for him.
There were also announcements in the radio two days later  where it said that it was in Lithuanian  in Russian  and in German  what said that but basically highlighting in Lithuanian.
You know  I guess  you know  I mean th -the the th-the thing from the from Ryevka   the thing that still stands out in my mind is that incident with the kids  you know  of them taunting me and and and calling me  you know  evra zhid  you know  and and Which is a terrible in in Russian its a terrible epithet.
I ran o -- ran off on the Russian side during the war  because Poland was kind of chopped in half.
5 The problem was  we went to the school -- I spoke Russian.
There was still 16 000 Jews there with a Russian unit...uh...running the camp because it was in a Russian zone.
And we had Russian prisoners  and you know  all kinds of prisoners walked alongside of us .
There was another little town called Tluste where we spent the Russian occupation.
And my father was convoked to the army as the officer because he was ordered the school  and did then in the first year of...uh... the battle 2 between German...German and Russian soldiers  he was taken into Russian captivity already in 1915 and he was there  which he knew Russian of course  so his conditions of life were not so difficult there.
Eventually it became part of the Russian sphere of influence and the communists took over.
Days before the Russian came  the French workers already  you know  let us know that they coming closer.
And they -- she organized here a group of people she knew  and they all went also to the rush -- toward the Russian border.
And how -- can you say -- Personally  through myself  it was -- well  the change was that first of all my father lost his business because the Russian -- there was no private enterprise allowed  so that -- so ac -- everything was expropriated.
Nineteen year old goes in with the–strongŠand my husband told me thats the big gest gun you can use  Russian made I thinkŠand–shoots at random and kills eight people and how many wounded.
In 1944 in September the barracks got more crowded  because people were being pushed with the Russian advance and Auschwitz being emptied  beginning to be emptied  and Birkenau and all these people came west and there was less work and less food and finally we didn't do anything anymore.
When anti-Semitism was very high in the woods  a group of Russian  there was a majorŠwh at was his name?
The burned down the whole prisoner of war camp--I told you Russian prisoners in there.
Wh en we were liberated by the Russians  few days  and I was fortunate to be accepted by the Russians when I only weighed 84 pounds  was a walking skeleton  but they did not accept as a as survivors because the Germans have even put up the skeletons  that saboteurs  ----------the Russians  so they don't know what experience they have  but was very strongly interrogated  but to my good fo rtune  there was a Russian  a Jewish Russian general  and I give him proof that I'm Jewish  so I was accepted actually  the greatest thing he could do for me  the uniform of a dead soldier was take o ff and given me  a part of it.
So by this time we not only had the Russian authorities after us  but we also had the Polish militia (ph.)
CE: The Russian  we -- c -- you saw the Russian soldiers  they came and we met them  we went down  met the soldiers.
where we fortificate on our fortification and German army start in fight Poland and our unit go back to east to Russian Soviet border and this was seventeen days like this and meantime the Soviet throw from th e plane information all units stop fighting with the Russians and Germans and go.
Search [indecipherable] house  that we li the Russian s were upstairs  because the you could hear the The footsteps.
How did -- how did -- was that a -- an ex -- an exhilarating moment  an exciting -- Oh  it certainly was  because hey  the Germans are defeated  and we are not under the Russian jurisdiction.
The first thing the Russian came in they said  if you people dont behave  we send you to Siberia .
Russian army  with the Polish army  which wa s fighting with Russian army.
So you stayed up in Russia  in the mountains for all those -- We stayed up there in Russia  yes  my wife -- my wife -- my mother worked in the bakery and I worked in the sewing machines over there and we -- we -- we didnt know yet where to go til they -- the Russian didnt tell us  if you want to leave Russia  you want to go to Poland  we were afraid to do it.
I said we're going to run trucks for 150 miles through the Russian zone  across the Polish Russian border  come down through the Russian zone to Berlin.
But you had to communicat e when you were in the partisans in Russian  right?
Berlin is an island in the middle of the Russian zone of Germany.
But I still -- I speak to them in English  I make them speak to me in Russian.
So the Russian soldiers  officers were from the honor guard  and marched in unison  a group of about 30  to every block  saluted and had a speech  the captain spoke  and when he came to our block--it was very moving--he said  the officer  he said he knows what happened to the Jewish people  knows what the Germans did.
And then this old Russian woman came  and she says Ganichka she says  doctors wont cure you  this is Siberian curse fell on you.
There was a little boy who was somehow able to get food to us and then we stayed for a while with Russian Jewish people because my sister kind of was engaged to the son.
It turned out th at because of the approaching Russian front and the chaos on the road  the truck didn't arrive that day.
A lady came out  old  you know  you [indecipherable] up everything with [indecipherable] she was afraid that the Russian were coming  do something to her.
When we finally -- when our investigator -- our historical investigators  those who could read Russian  finally got access to the records of the Trawniki trained guards in the federal security -- the archive of this Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation in the early 90s  they found the notes of the KGB investigator who saw that file  and the notes that he took were consistent with the type of information that was on other personnel files.
My uncle who was with him  he saw it  he run to the street  and the the Russian tanks  you know  were coming  you know.
A few minutes later we could hear 01:54: some more shooting and before you know it  the were Russian tanks  Russian tanks moved into camp.
8 utterly impressed by it because during the...the negotiations for the London agreement  which was signed on August 8  1945  they'd had to have interpreters in there translating from the American to the French to the Russian and so on.
Then I got a job with the German Air Force  the headquarters of the German Air Force for the Russian Front was in Riga.
No  no  it happened that  because it there were they brought they were telling a story  they brought Russian prisoner s of war to dig the ditches for that.
And the people -- again  they would starve them to death and then they would take people very weak  they call them musselmens  you know  just like skeletons  and they would make him go to Russian cemetery to bury them.
My brother was went with one nice Russian Byelorussian man  went to Wolkowysk   and to see my father and to take some food for him  and they didnt let him see my father.
The Russian Army was very poorly equipped  and he lost his toes on one leg because of the cold weather and inadequate clothing.
He was drafted in to the old Czarist Russian army in World War I. He was wounded at the battle of Tannenberg  the only battle the Russians really fought in World War I and was a prisoner of war in Austri a-Hungary for four years.
And so I left them and I could not go over to the Russian side -- they didn't let me -- I couldn't go with them.
So actually many Russian people then stayed there  even the Russian army told them to stay there and help through the uprising.
Nazis called it Mexico because when they brought the Russian prisoners there  they didn't have any clothes  so they put blankets on them.
What my mother did when the Russian occupied us  she says  oh  we finally have something  we staying here  what they can do to us?
It was Russian hold the crematoriums and the gas chambers were working 48 hours.
You know  the U...when the Germans was coming in  the Ukrainians were in seventh heaven cause they were tired of the Russian dominance or the Russian Communists.
And Russian soldiers came in and they took I imagine they saw girls.
As a matter of fact  later on in life  she had to make a living ou t of her knowledge of Russian and of Russian literature and Russian language  so she took a second degree in -- in the 50s in Romania and became a teacher before my father ma -- was already in and didnt have a job and she had to sustain the family.
Everybody was learning Russian in Sweden--it was the only country there  it was the only country there  and it looked like the Russians will run them over any moment.
So one of the Russian officers came out and st arted talking with us.
So they separated us  but we lived on the -- how you call it -- sarai in Russian language  how you call -- with this hays -- haystack?
That one of the dramatic things of my father which took me many years to understand is when my...when the Russian left Lithuanian and the Germans advanced to Lithuanian.
I also I thought to myself  it s going to come in a German guard  Im going to show them that I am a Russian and I traveled there to see some relatives.
I went with a friend  a Russian 17 speaking friend  and we went to Kiev and we asked if anybody would take us to this place which is about 150 kilometers from Romney a nd everybody shied away and said  no you need a special permit  this is a closed country.
When you say Russian uniforms  what is it -- what -- Russian uniform from -- The ar -- -- their prisoners of war.
They had  we lived underground  like they call it in Russian   underground.
Thats why it was so difficult to s-save sometimes  children  because they spoke Russian and they spoke Yiddish and they didnt speak Lithuanian.
Then I went to a school  you know  and I become know...to know Russian language more.
We dug for whatever food we could in the forest and we stayed in the forest and eventually we saw the Russian army come in and take over  and we went out.
And they got -- they got Russian prisoners of war  too.
We -- my brother-in-law was [indecipherable] he used to go over to the Russian side.
He told the Russian captain the story and one day we took a truck with soldiers and went to arrest this farmer.
You see  as a child  I di dnt really  was expo sed to much to the rich because my parents  being students and be ing  and this time with t he Russian revolution  didnt  were not religious at all.
Just was a Russian girl; but she was...was a Russian camp  too  there.
They had taken out the Jewish and Russian prisoners to Ninth Fort and they dig...dug trenches.
And then  one day I was  for example  in a s-store  where the clerk was a young Jewish boy  a Russian.
The -- we had -- in the beginning we had a lot of young people  but then the Russian -- Just a min -- could you -- theres -- something s the matter with the tape. [
SE: In Odessa  there is the camp for -- for -- vacation camp for Russian people that go there.
We came in together with another family  and in the middle of the night came a p easant  a Polish peasant  or a White Russian peasant  I dont know  and said you have to run  because there are German parachutists already here.
>> Bill Benson: Rae  you lived under the Russian occupation for the better part of almost two years.
But otherwise they were  you know  hurry  hurry  hurry  and th ey would bring usually toward the end of the day  they would bring us in the pails  some kind of soup which was watery mixed vegetables  and ve ry hard  Russian bread  you know  like Yeah.
Because the woman in the house  t he German got friendly -- the Russian got friendly with the German people there.
So in po -- Russian is called Lotchik  so people called me Lotchik.
All of a sudden the door is open  you can come in  you have a sistreechka  a sister  in Russian.
Can you tell me before you tell me a bout going back to your aunt  can you tell me about actually seeing the Russian troops come and liberate?
USHMM Archives RG -50.030*0151 13 They were sent in un some camps again in the Romanian territory  in Bessarabia if I recall  and uh later on in uh Russian territory.
So the Russians go the Russian government gave a visa  as was already after the revolution  b-because she was an orphan  they gave a visa to go to her sisters.
And so  within hours I had orders  I think they were signed by General Bradley  to go into the Russian zone  to the libera to Theresienstadt  to carry out the instructions of the theater commander  that was Eisenhower  that f were my orders.
In my house  in my apartment  there were my two grandparents and one aunt with two children whose husband was taken to the Russian Army.
And then I-I think through Major Shike or somehow  we got a Russian military truck to take us along  who was going to Berlin anyway  also with all our luggage.
I knocked on the door a nd that the Russian was very afraid.
So  I didnt see very much of I do remember  before the Germans came of I was walking again with the well  we either my mother or my ma her mother  my grandmother would take me for walks  you know  in Vilnius  and before the Russians left  I saw Interview with Arvydas Kliore February 18  2013 13some right around Cathedral Square   there there there were a few trucks passed with loaded with people and with Russian soldiers with bayonets standing in the corners of the truck.
The borders were watched by Hungarian and Russian soldiers and uh it was very difficult to escape.
And this agrees comp letely with the description to Ezergailis book  which was taken from quite another source  namely from some of the executioners themselves  later they would test -- they would give depositions -- they were in -- in Russian custody and they gave depositions for some German war times -- war crim e trials.
Germany was a very advanced -- with everything  technologically  and a -- and how could a nation do that to every people in the world  and not just Jews  to Russian  [indecipherable] and Gypsies.
You know you couldnt talk any Russian to them but we made a motion that we wanted the ring and we gave them an apple or gave them a slice of bread  you know.
And if you put it publicly the Russian embassy gonna make a protest... [END] Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
In Russia in those areas  they make they call it lapti 13 in Russian.
She says you know  Francisca  when the Russian come and I pretend to be Russian  I couldn't do what you do  so she uh took me in.
So you didnt have to study marx No politics  no pol the one politics is the ru Russian motherland  thats whats impo was the most important Okay.
So Israel will have a Jewish bomb and Russia has a Russian bomb and we start bringing in religion into politics.
And it was just happens that it was close to the day  13th of April  1940  when the NKVD  thats the police Russian police  and some communist  local communist and translator came with early in the morning and took us came to us and said  yo u have half an hour to get up and to get down to the lorry thats waiting outside to ta ke you by train to Siberia.
There was my grandfather  grandmother  my father's sister with her two children whose husband was taken into the Russian Army; and of course the four of us.
He says  ﬁWe have to organize the Jewish community.ﬂ Ther e were about 20 our people  Russian speaking Jews.
But till till thirty '39 when it was the pact  the Russian with the with the Germans  we didn't heard what was going on there.
How did you -- there was also  I think  a document you sent to the museum  something from a Russian sergeant allowing you to go from one zone to the next.
05:10:32 No  there was like a room  and I don't know how many of us slept in that room  but that when  then I tell you when  the thing  when the Russian came what we had to do.
The first camp that I was was on Oranie nbergerstrasse in the ru -- Russian sector.
During the Russian occupation  he helped a Polish woman...uh...professor of a gymnasium...uh... She...her father was a rich man.
Just took us away  put us in prison  and later we found out that the reason we were arrested there was one Russian officer  a lieutenant  who was anti-Semite.
I knew -- knew what Communism is and I knew what Russian occupation is  I wasnt interested.
We stay ed in his house until the Russian front came.
But I can tell you that after the 23 months  when the Russian army advanced  the [indecipherable] army advanced  and I remember that the first battalion who encountered us was an -- a battalion commanded by an Ukrainian major.
And then it -- I was in the -- in the house and the artillery -- the Russian artillery  shot aw-away the ha -- the roof.
I  I got very  very  very in bad shape  pain  and I walked Erwin Baum 7 December 5  1995 Page 7 out of that  of that camp and there was this  on the road there was the field kitchen that the soldiers were fed  and I went and I was crying  \ Pain  pain  pain \  and there was one American soldier of Russian descent and he spoke a little kind of broken Polish  and I told him that I'm so sick.
And he was fascinated  \ Who was the gi rl who was talking Russian?\
And from there  we put them on trucks into and tried to smuggle them in through the Russian border into Berlin.
As the Germans advanced  and they discovered immediately the Russian propaganda was saying that the Germans did it  you know  and they tried to blame the Russians for this.
So  I stayed another night at the household of that woman  and the next morning I got into his office and he said  okay  put me at his desk  wrote the Russian alphabet out for me and says you learn Russian and in the meantime I'll give you a salary.
Somebody  appare ntly there must have been some people who spoke Yiddish or either the Russian soldiers spoke Yiddish or they spoke Russian.
I-I dont speak a perfect Russian  but I manage to speak.
Hitler was fighting on the Russian front where all the Ger...they needed the soldiers on the Russian front  so you had the Catholic citizen  the Belgium citizen  in hiding because they didn't want to go to work in Germany  and it's hard to comprehend.
I was a poor Russian  you know  and I -- you know  and they told me I killed Christ  you know.
Nathan Neiberg: Stayed in Vienna of like a couple of weeks the captain of the post in Vienna  the Russian captain of the post in Vienna assigned us a place to stay in a hotel.
It was in June  maybe July or maybe August  one morning they lined us all up and they say they have to evacuate because the Russian made the offensive.
Suddenly a terribly drunk Russian soldier walked in and he started to say gold  gold   and I turned around and I said we don't have gold but my super was there and whatever he answered I don't know.
They told us that in Poland the Jews were massacred in the forest  that they were dumped into mass graves and that the earth was moving on top of the grave for weeks after the shootings  after the killings  that not all of them were completely killed and the ones who came back from the Russian front  they apparently must have met Einsatztruppen or saw them in action  they said the Jews were taken out from the town to a field outside the town and they were rounded up and all of them were brought together and they were surrounded and then the Germans mounted the machine gun on a truck and they were circling around these surrounded people and they were machine gunning them and as long as they kept on circling them and firing into them until they assumed that everybody was killed.
This is tape number two  side B. Okay  after the Russian soldiers ar overpowered the Germans  the Hitler youth  even though they had weapons  but they were so frightened  they just froze.
The Russian soldiers  wherever they were  when somebody wanted to come this way  the Russians said go back.
And so and she herself was given a post in the county seat where she was working because she knew Russian.
So there was some kind of shower someplace in the building in this in this Russian kitchen  so to say for me to take a shower there.
The Russian military sent some officers to help to organize the partisans into a fighting group.
I was wearing a nice watch  that I had got for my bar mitzvah  and here I am on the tank  and the Russian officer comes in  and he says  ﬁI like your watch.
So our audience understands   so you are in the Russian -occupied part of the country.
I mean  when you and you father left Lodz -- Lodz  looking for a place in the Russian zone that -- that your family coul d relocate  did you -- did you have any idea at USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0017 9 all or any sense that you would be split u -- your -- your family would be split up the way that it was?
He was a very frail man  and it was literally about two months before his death and he may not have been thinking as clearly  but the agreement then was that Czechoslovakia would be part of -- under Russian control more or less.
And to come to Greece  by the Romania to cut the German and probab ly the Russian to go toward west.
And we stay in Kostovitz from -- it was in 44 yes  til end of the war  which was actually when German army passed by  because -- German -- Russian army -- because you know  during the uprising  the army was on opposite side of Vistula  and they didnt want to take any action because it was different group figh ting  that was London group fighting in Warsaw.
And a Russian soldier woul d stand with a gun over you.
My parents belonged to this...this students that actually lived very...very actively participated in the Russian revolution and even when they became successful  they still spoke Russian at home and all...all the ideals about the equality and fraternity were very much imbedded in their minds and this...they embedded in us also.
This time they killed thirty-five thousand German  Vienne se  Czech and Russian Jews.
And about a week later I uh  with a Russian transport  I went to Budapest and as I arrived in Budapest  it was one day after liberation.
And I always...I didn't care to be on the...the Russian side.
I don't write about that this camp is different from the tent camp and the Russian.
She gave  I asked her where she  she what her husband  and she told me her husband is on the Russian front  he's from German descent  and she showed me 2 ch ildren.
I was in Lvov medical school  I learn Russian from some colleagues that spoke Russian and I told him and he said that's all baloney  I dont believe one word you say  you must be a spy.
It was such an enormous uplifting for me to see th e Russian-German  the Russian soldiers coming into that little... They came on tanks.
This whole area was occupied by Russian partisans  so really there was no Germans there.
And when I looked down  and I saw the Russian tank and the two Russian soldiers with the red star on it  I knew  I knew a miracle had happened in my life  I knew a messiah came.
And the White Russian peasantry was a lot more sympathetic to Jews than Polish.
And they was working  you know  they give them the -- the hardest work  you kno w. There was Russian  Jewish people  and Polish people was treating the worst.
So hundred and hundred of Russian people stayed there in Slovakia .
So they knew Russian  my father 25 spoke Russian to them and he told th em that we think there is a family living here  if they knew that we would be here  they would certainly take us in and we wouldn't have to go to Yorktown  Saskatchewan.
I lost my job  because start already the Russian immigration and they not keep open the jobs.
Some people came in injured who reported that just a couple of blocks from us there were already Russian soldiers so it was that  that  that tension that kept me from doi ng anything else except just waiting for that final onslaught when I can see that our area is liberated.
I don't remember na turally what happened but I remember when I opened my eyes I saw a big room with a lot of women laying there and some Russian doctor who happened to be Jewish talking to me and telling me that I was unconscious for three days.
So  as they were waiting in the forest  the Russian group came by.
Nothing against him  it was nothing against him  but they were very worried that hes a Russian citizen  whats going to be?
I was called Maria  I am Maria in short; it is in Russian  Marsha.
And in the entire class there being two people that spoke Russian.
Well  when it was -- when I saw the Russian soldiers  it was a moment of joy that I was liberated.
The interesting thing is you know when I was in Nuremberg and after the war in the course of the Russian advance against Germany and my aunt and two of my little cousins  two little children managed to escape to the dp camp in Berlin  and they can tell you and testify as to details of how things proceeded.
You know  this is hundred miles away  this is almost on the -- on the line with -- where the two armies  the Russian and the -- a-and the ar -- western forces met.
So Bank came back and trained us in the use of the plastic explosives and they gave us rifles  German  Italia n and Russian rifles.
So the first half a hour after the outbreak of the war that there was no more Russian might  the Lithuanian fascists -- they called themselves Siauliaitists or Siaulitists   I don't know exactly -- the very same organization who before the war was doing all the anti-Jewish activities  they were within one half an hour in uniforms.
Because mary many Russian soldiers were in concent labor camps and in concent even concentration camps.
And you could see immediately the effect of -- [indecipherable] of Polish Jews who were -- who were in the ghetto  because they liquidated small places  and those who survived came to -- to Minsk  also other Russian je -- places  the ghettos were immediately liquidated  or slowly  and -- and they came to -- to Minsk.
If English were being spoken  it would be translated into German  French and Russian  and if Russian were being spoken  it would be translated into the other three languages  and so on.
When the Russian come in  first of all  they took away the rich and the and and this what and what they didnt like the ca ca zi-zi Zionist  and took them to Siberia.
Maybe that's Neu r-rev because that's my Russian name  Anna is Neur-rev .
So were talking  was there still a division be tween Russian and German Jews at this point?
I had to try and do everything so that she wouldnt be seen  and eventually I got her certificate  and how to send her to the airport which was in the Russian zone?
And thats the first premonition you have -- That is pre-premonition that theres some -- and then they introduced -- no  they introduced Soviet bases  basi  bases for Russian soldiers.
He told me I have a way to escape  through the forest there's underground armies  Polish underground  Russian underground  fighting the Germans  we can join them.
Me  they put in the Russian barracks  me and my friend Marvin Shapiro.
I arrived there  and the -- and I reported to a unit that was a s -- an office with a -- a small office with a junior officer and a sergeant over there  and there were another 14 or 13 or 14 young men  and we were assigned to an army sp ecialized training program to study Russian.
His wife was completely different  very talkative  very expressive  liked to discuss things with with here in with me with my poor Russian  which she corrected all the time.
And we was there maybe a half a day and they met  and the Russian was already there  pa trol no  what's the name in English what you send out  you send out patrol yeah  patrol.
Before that it was Russian  so I was rais ed in the classics of both languages.
And the Russian didn't care that I'm Jewish  that I am...I'm not a...I'm not running for the Germans.
The Russian bombs  they only took the last 2 floors up on the top.
And I I...I said I was one of them who was instrumental in this  so every morning when we came  he whispe red to us what he had heard during the night  and in this respect uh we  or I was fully familiar with the progress of uh the Russian army in Stalingrad and of the other defeat of the 6th German army under in Stalingrad and especially when when when it came to an end with the with the loss of approximately three hundred thousand German soldiers  so the questi on came  how long will they be able?
Because as I stated it before in my recordings to say they were afraid to take them out to the big pits that the Russian making because of the fear of the partisans.
So I went with two Russian prisoners to a barbed -wire.
My parents were Russian Jews  who had come to this country around the turn of the century and I had an older sister who was born in 1913 and a younger brother  who lives in California.
And fortunately they were not treated nearly as badly as the Russian prisoners of war.
It was not an easy situation actually because we were always worried that there might be Russians around trying to pick up people because sometimes we had Russian army officers who were Jewish.
So my lieutenan t tries to speak to them  he doesnt speak Russian  and I dont speak Russian either.
You know  his plans where to take me with him to his hometown  escape and go to his hometown and  of course  he knew that I spoke Russian.
So a Interview with Hannah Kalman May 20  1999 46young soldier came over and he ask me what language I can speak and I told him  a little bit German  a little bit Polish  a little Russian  so he spoke German  not too well  but he spoke.
Some of us knew Russian  because they occupied some of the country.
It was a Communist party under Russian supervision  and they were taking everybody  like not everybody.
But this 03:25army - the Poli sh army doesn't matte r because it was under supervision of the Russian army.
And he saw me on his hand  his hand  that \ We are -- around the city is already the Russian Army.\
A. All our books -- that was a Russian bomb and the Russian bomb never went all the way down to the basement like the American and British.
When suddenly the shooting stopped  and I said to Julian  am I crazy  or did I hear a Russian words there?
Next day they took twenty thousand...the the the headquarters from the army made a big...see Russian like propaganda.
So therefore Im not surprised that we didnt receive the news from all the things which happened under the occupation in the Russian territory.
That was a Scandinavian country and yes  thats about it and yeah  he was in control of just about everything and he was now starting his Russian front.
We also had to study Russia -- Russian  and Yiddish before we spoke Hebrew  because what I was [indecipherable] was that Jewish or Yiddish is a jargon  its part of German  which is not true  but I mean in the -- and you have to learn Hebrew  which -- and that was the modern Hebrew  not the religious Hebrew like [indecipherable].
I had my Russian [indecipherable] certificate in one additional year  which is unusual.
Rae Goldfarb: She enlisted in the Russian Army as a worker and we -- we got lodging in a boxcar and traveled with the train to fix water towers.
Because he knew very good Russian and he wanted to meet  so when the lights went up  he saw me and in this times I had two long  very long hair and I still  I think I was wearing braids at this time  looking very young.
Well  in my heart I was a Jew  but with the clothes and everything  he I was a Russian soldier  of course.
And  he says  ﬁAnd you stay here  maybe the next group will take you because we dont have room.ﬂ There was apparently 25 of them in this group  this Russian group.
Interview with Gerald Liebenau September 12  2012 10 In her family  German and Russian were the language.
My parents spoke Yiddish to each other  Russian to their kids  and we kids spoke French.
Well  they know that the ammunition was losed in this action  was Russian ammunition.
And then they retreated because Russians were supposed to  according to Molotov-Ribbentrop   Biaystok was supposed to be in Russian.
All he want to take a a Russian passport  or he wants to go back home?
I went to a Russian school where they indoctrinated the students to love Stalin.
I said  ﬁIm not going to that class.ﬂ So what they did  very good thing  they gather all the older children that they dont belong to the first grade  10 - 11 - 12 even  and we got into one class  it was intensive study  because we had background in Russian  we already knew how to read.
So were you with Orlovsky until -- Til the -- -- til the Russian army came?
See Japan was always -- considered herself an enemy of Russian communism.
I had my final exams  they had to be in the Russian language.
We remained in the unit and we were the first am ong the Russian units  in a lot of Russian units.
The -- the Russian  which is why -- they went to a different woods.
Some Russian soldier felt sorry for me  gave me his coat.
How little I knew that the firm was assigned to build the barricades in Krakow to slow down the Russian approach and also to destroy historical buildings from Krackow and all the bunkers around the German buildings because this was after the Warsaw uprise from the Poles and they expected it in Krakow.
In Russian part was not so easy  and my father c-come back from the ne -- I call this prison  and start workin g  like I said before  for na -- state  and start educated himself.
And I said to my wife  \ Soon or later  very soon  you will have your Russian.
And now we have like an a different thing in that are you Russian?
Yeah  there were some for instance  there were some some Jewish families changed their house language  their family language from Yiddish to Russian  and Lithuanians resented that  you know  he he they give up Yiddish  why then dont they dont pick up Lithuanian?
And then they would tie it with a rope  and there the guy responsible  supervisor a ma a Russian guy  would come and stamp these pieces.
I wa -- I was fluently -- I na -- I was speaking fluently Russian bu -- and was reading Russian newspapers.
I met my father back when they took him away to the Russian army.
I went to the man of the kitchen  in charge and he was from White Russian  a Polish citizen from White Russia and he wanted to learn how to speak German.
I was scared of the Russians  because a -- what I went through with this -- with the raping of those women and -- and the be -- they behavior  that I -- I was scared of them  because I dont know if I said it  when I was freed finally  they drafted me in the Russian army for a few days  where I escaped  because we -- thanks to a -- a bag of sugar.
Raoul said look behind me  there are two Russian officers on the motor bike and I'm invited to go back to   but I don't know if I'm going as a visitor but I want to give you all the money that I have so that you can help the people that we already helped.
It's hard for me to explain what..uh...they lose  Germans they lose in the war  and Russian army come...uh...come back to Ukraine.
All of a sudden before that there were Poles that were ther e. The Russians came in and the Russians took over that camp and made it into a Russian military camp.
I took about– We went through th at strategy twice  in 1939 but it lasted two days because soon we hear on the radio that the Russian army cr oss the border and are coming to liberate us  we werent scared anymore  because the Germans we re still 150 kilometers from us.
As ill as she was  my mother's lady  she was a very fine woman  but I guess survival is over taken everything and you run like animals at that time  and we started to make plans that one day 01:34: we will meet at the main station and take a train and again to go into a place or maybe we will ask somebody where we will be able to work  or maybe we'll go to the Russian border and maybe we will be across the border to go to Russian that we shouldn't be under the German occupation.
But  in 1940  when the Russians came in  I was graduating and they pushed us to learn Russian in that one year.
You know  the Uzbeki stans  the nobody talk Russian  only one presidatel   he talk Russian that we could commun communicated with them  and the rest Uzbekistan   they didnt speak eng Russian.
So I met with them  and they showed me patents  but I couldnt re ad them as done in Cyrillic Russian  and but I could make out their names.
Next thing I remember  opening my eyes and seeing a man with a white coat on and talking to me in Russian  explaining to me that he is a doctor  that I shouldnt worry  Im in a hospital and he would love to know my name.
The Russian Army is advancing and they should be here within weeks probably  and with this they left.
What we first witnessed wa s a few Polish Jews who came right after the  the Russian Army  Soviet Army.
He says  just go over and tell him  [Russian spoken here]  which means  hello friend  give me a marking  or your emblem  and those were my first Russian words I learned.
And um  well  she told me to put the valuables on the  on the table  or no  uh she did  she did it  and then we went to the bedroom to collect uh you know uh  uh warm things  just a few things they let us have  and she said to me in Russian  my mother was Russian originally  she said to me  \ Throw these-- \  uh  uh she had it in a little uh sack  \ Throw it in the toilet and flush the water \  and I as an obedient daughter did that you know  and um  they took us to  they closed the apt  they sealed it  and they took us to a place which was actually my high school  and there I saw  I thought that we were only arrested because deportation were not with it  uh  uh  uh  uh they were not  uh  uh we didn't know about deportations yet  this was just November you know  and we realized that there were maybe  later we found out there were a thousand people  both Polish Catholics and Jews from Poland.
He kept yelling in German  and I kept talking to him in Russian and crying  you know  \ My mother.
Interview with Go ldie Buch Jonas May 5  2013 33 Russian and Jewish.
Greek Orthodox  Im not sure  maybe not  but Christmas was Christmas  so maybe they werent  but they spoke with a Russian accen t. They werent born in Wierzbnik; they came from the Russian side.
We should have nothing to do with funding from the allies  or somebody said that we -- the Russian are sending tons of money for the -- for the Communist  for the propaganda  for everything.
I mean  it -- it simply -- thi -- th i -- this is -- the moment this division exists in the person  where to him  you know  where a Russian is bad  and an Englishman is good -- I mean  this is total bullshit of course  total nonsense.
Of course I later learned the reason that uh she had been uh kept at the police headquarters was that uh my father had uh uh a lot of uh being that he was wealthy and uh had connections with the leading uh members of the community  so even after the ghetto was organized  he was able to uh obtain through uh uh payment a document from the uh uh mayor of the town in Zwolen and the uh German commissar  the German uh governor of the town  a special document for uh as a merchant and uh supplier of uh the uh uh shoes to the German army and whatever  so he he obtained uh a passport uh so to speak  a uh it was which a document with which he was able to travel and uh the idea was that uh after uh the war broke out and the  Poland was divided to the German Russian sphere of influence  uh his uh he owned two trucks that were confiscated so uh we couldn't get no means of escape but uh he was still dreaming of the  to get us uh out somehow uh with money that he still had and influence.
They were mostly p -- Polish Russian -- mostly eastern Europe.
I dont know how to I understand Yiddish  and now when I am working with Russian refugees  they are very happy when they hear.
Everything is in ruins and if is a car  it is occupied by the Russian or by American  so the only way you have is walk.
If they're not some of them were running away from the Army  which there was a lot of Russian Jewish officers.
