They might have decided to do something like that  certainly after they came across Buchenwald  which was about the same time they discovered others further south  but we had no actual 3 According to the International Refugee Organization  Flossenburg was liberated on 23 April 1945 following a mass evacuation of most of the prisoners to Dachau three days earlier.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 >> Bill Benson : And that would go on until you were liberated by the Russians.
So finally they made us go back to the barracks and we what they did took 10 prisoners from the group  Russians and hanged them in the camp.
they had big place where people had you know like steam baths and all that of course that was for  private people but at that time they will confiscate those big places  and they were running the prisoners in and they- and they told us to disrobe  take all your clothes off and you had to walk through something like  now if you hear that everybody might have a different story  because there was not standard like-like you go to McDonald and here or and somewhere else  you know everything was Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
You would hear them say something like if there were any deaths or if there were any killings the prisoners themselves must have done it.
I was up on the beach  and my duties then were  again  I I had a an interrogation team and we were interrogating prisoners of war.
We went to our commander  and we told him th at we brung -- brought the prisoners here  but he said where are the prisoners and we couldnt produce you  so how about if you give us some money?
There was a program where I went and maybe it was in this other camp  you know it's unclear  but I clearly know I went where the prisoners were allowed to mimic the Germans  you know  and they all laughed.
And that's when we would see these prisoners who had been walking ahead of us for a couple of days.
Immediately beside the...the prisoners' dock was the interpreting section which had about eight interpreters in it.
And they put us up in the schoolhouse where or -- other -- other form of prisoners were.
Other -- you mean other prisoners were beating them up  or the Russian Army?
And that was - you know  I think when prisoners are in prison who break out of a prison  I think thats how they spend their days  thinking forever how to break out.
Now  those special rations which every two weeks or so were supplied to heavy -- to indus -- to workers who were working in heavy industry -- prisoners or civilians were sometimes identical  yeah.
And then there was an amnesty in Poland -- in Siberia  and the nonpolitical prisoners were allowed to join the Polish Army fighting with General Anders with the Allies  and he joined the Army.
And they were allowed to go through the German lines  all the way to the camp  and arrive at the camp and started loading American prisoners.
But the the prisoners were well-behav ed  one of the key problems that we had as we entered this camp when others did who they en tered their camp  was the disease problem.
37 In mid-January 1945  the SS began evacuating the Auschw itz camps system some 60 000 prisoners were sent on death march to concentration camps further we st.
You know  then we were so nai ve  we were so incredibly naive --of course  depended --that when we got off the train  we saw the SS men or other older prisoners taking the carriages and the children off the train and putting them beside.
Then we were transported -- were arrest -- I -- I believe that we spent maybe a night in prison  Im not sure  but I know what I remember.
I did that with regard to the Wuelfert case simply because I felt like don't let them get off simply because they were being nice to prisoners and letting them eat.
It wa a cold wet day  as I recall  and even with our uniforms and jacket s we were uncomfortable  and you can imagine what the poor prisoners suffered in that same ve in.
The Czech prisoners descended on the train  and this was a language Id never heard in my life  and I couldnt make out what they were saying.
And then Jewish Agency got a hold of all the prisoners list.
So  Helena put her cape  the cape over her clothes and put the womans hat  and we 79 all decided... No  I didnt decide– But the ten of us  not the twelve  the ten of us who made it off the road  onto the field and aw ay from the evacuees on the road  were supposed to pretend that we are the prisoners and Helena was our guard  and she was guiding us - no  not guiding us.
What was it like for you to see the Ge rman soldiers brought into custody  taken prisoners?
And the political prisoners had their own companionship with -- since Ravensbruck  w ho -- there were couples who were already established couples.
But in one of the camps you have a listing of people who were killed each day  and this was partly kept by a Kapo  a Kapo  a...one of the prisoners  one of the inmates of the camp himself.
So  fo r example  the prisoners of war who had been killed  are not recognized the victims of the war to that kind of some kind of the defense that Russian would  after finally admitting that it was Russians  at first they said th-the the German forces came with the po the Russian prisoners of war who are in Russia.
>> I'm just curious about the culture among prisoners in Auschwitz and how you interacted with each other while you were under such harsh conditions.
You see  at that time they took to Auschwinsche n Jews and non-Jews for a certain reason  for they did something -what was the They called them like political prisoners.
We -- we trained them in everything  and we had regular German prisoners of war  the very first who had been taken in North Africa were brought to Camp Richie.
I didn't say that my my original name in Poland was Salzman and uh that means salt man and my...I  as I recall the story of I heard from my father  my ancestors lived in that village  that town  and their business was to buy and transport salt to the neighboring countries and when in the late 17th century or maybe it was early 18th century  the tax 10 officials decided that everyone including Jews must have last name for tax purposes  and they just called my...they assigned a name to my great-great-grandfather uh that he had...uh that was associated with his occupation  so that's where the Salzman came and it was at that town that this camp was located  with most of the prisoners working in the salt mine.
And the snow -- the -- the blood was color -- starting to color the snow  and that wa s good  because nobody else attempted a second shot  that the guy must have had it  you know  but -- so when the column past  I suddenly had strength to pick myself up  and went into the forest  and found like minded people  other prisoners who escaped  having been lucky  not getting shot.
Did you feel the need to render any medical assistance to any of the prisoners?
And Colonel Karnavolov was the guy who signed it and it was a special Krokov  some kind of Karnavolov punt  th is is where they used to collect all the war prisoners  look in the records  check if they were traitors or not  anything like this.
And so they worked outside the camp somewhere and they were treated almost as badly as Jewish prisoners.
Well  there was a mixture  well  when I arrived there naturally you have to see a show  they produced for you  not so much Germans  but the prisoners in many cases are criminals.
And so th en I said  ﬁCould I go to the dentist?ﬂ And with eight other prisoners  we were brought by a soldier with a machine gun to the 83 dentist.
Moved the spotlight over the door -- o-over the -- the window in the door on the -- this is the dining room in the Palace Hotel in Mondorf wh ere the prisoners ate their meals  served on porcelain plates with spoons only  no knives or forks permitted.
The burned down the whole prisoner of war camp--I told you Russian prisoners in there.
Th ey say suppose you were in combat  and you take Chinese  or Korean prisoners.
This is why the children  we were at home  just locked in -- no-not like prisoners  because life was wonderful and you read books  you -- I read Tolstoy.
Now go back to when you were in the camp  and te ll me about any sabotage that you did or that other prisoners did.
But our main work was with prisoners of war  to identify students in the prisoner of war camps  particularly in Germany  cause we were in Switzerland.
You're going to build airport and the French war prisoners will build the hangar.
And on both sides big  long lines with the prisoners marching  with the inmates marching.
But anyway  went to see my brother And fa when did you chan ge your prisoners clothing?
And...uh...but the...uh... word that the war has taken a turn and the Allied Forces are making advances started to take hold by seeing that the Germans are starting to liber ate...not liberate  to...uh...dispose of these camps and sending the...uh... prisoners out to different camps located further into Germany.
Uh this food was still in the wa rehouses in Paris  was appearing in the French black marketŠin other words the parcels were being stolen from the warehouses and uh this uh American officer said to me if you go to the Quartermaster General and ask for th ese parcels for the prisoners of war  they might be given to you.
It was clean  and there was some business going on with the Polish prisoners.
We came to a place near near a bridge in the some of the prisoners tried to escape.
They were maybe seven feet wide and ten feet long  and there were already nine prisoners.
And that was because  I think they were  somebody said they we re  you know  talking about the other prisoners.
They all got taken prisoners  so he asked me if I could give the address  so I gave the address of the contact I had.
Well  of course you know  all those prisoners coming from the east  consequently the front line is coming.
And I asked my cousin  \ Come with me \  because I knew there is some camp of some prisoners  Italians  and I think that maybe I can walk over there  or do something.
I was very outspoken on that  and -- which all -- is the American way  we dont mistreat prisoners generally  and there were some ex ception  which also looked -- could have happened -- when I said one time that somebody asked me this could happen here.
And I was so shocked that I didn't talk to any of these prisoners.
I also find it very surprising that a principal would ask an eight year old child to meet with prisoners of war.
Oh he -- yeah  yeah  she -- he looked terrible  and of course  while you were waiting there  for educational reasons they dragged by prisoners at has -- had just been tortured  or led to torture.
I dont know why he decided  probably ha -- asked for some prisoners of war  Soviet prisoners of war from Austria  he was from Austria.
On the way we me t lots of columns of other prisoners from Auschwitz  and we walked 50 kilometers.
Did you witness any acts of retaliation or retribution against former guards or collaborators?
But the prisoners were not a llowed to check out any books.
But wherever we went  we picked up several prisoners and they non-Jewish prisoners and they went to camp with us.
A sea of humanity of the prisoners from this huge camp that was beyond us.
There -- theres af -- however  however  I found out that there were many prisoners of war.
Uh  the population of Auschwitz from uh the beginning several hundred immediately jump up to several thousand when the 1st transports of prisoners arrived from Warsaw of about 4 transpor ts within about six weeks.
And I was able to do it  instead of like some  and they were very detested by the old prisoners  we called them \ Alter Haeftling \  means \ old prisoner\  and there were the new prisoners which  you know  they felt they still had a good life for a while  which was their right  you know.
Q. Were there other prisoners who were imprisoned because they were homosexual?
So  former former female prisoners Right in Dachau were let go out of the camp  so they went into Dachau   which is only like a half a mile away.
And also another incident  there was a group of musicians in the camp  musicians in the camp during the war  Germans had prisoners  musicians.
The food was prepared by ordinary German prisoners  who also did the se rving. [
But we looked like criminals  because we had this shaven hair  shaven heads  and we had these outfits  you know  special outfits  and we looked like prisoners.
Not always every of these prisoners who were killed on spot.
And we had German prisoners of war when I was at Fort Dupont and I had some funny experiences with them  too.
The  uh  thing that I remember was we started to see our men being killed and because of our men being killed  a couple here and a couple there  we would kill whole squads of Germans the way they mowed down the  uh  prisoners and  uh  their opponents.
But when we started to march mainly an SS man with a big 4 German dog  and outside where already the other prisoners were standing in a line and seeing us coming in.
And the gates were opened for new prisoners and he ran out and down a hill.
They threw me in a small little army cot with...uh...three more...four or five Russian prisoners.
They still had to be incarcerated for a time being but later on I remember a column of those Germans just left and maybe they went to a different camp.
You see  at that time we knew there were concentration camps.
We went to this cremator ium and then we kept talking to the prisoners all the way and then we were taken up to the big building where the SS had had its headquarters.
And we walked he took me back to the front lines  because he felt I would be safer in the company  as a as a soldier  than being caught as a insurgent with a gun  and wounded  because they were shooting all the wounded prisoners.
And there we cleaned the street and  and -- till the one day came that all the Jewish prisoners of war from Pole had to be sent back to Pole.
The people who the peopl e who were older prisoners there  were they Polish as well?
So yi -- ni -- thats your job from now on  thats your cover.ﬂ Then he explained to me that a ll the prisoners were on the third and fourth floor  some two in a room  some single rooms.
While -- excuse me  while I was riveting -- joining parts of the wings of the p -- airplanes  I noticed a small notatio n in a Russian script  done by the Russian prisoners of war who worked at night shift  i-instructing us what to do and how to sabotage.
And when the war ended  somehow we were -- this camp was close to the Austrian border  and a lot of people were brought in  including some who had been in Maut hausen as prisoners of -- as prisoners in the German camp.
But here I am in a prison  a huge prison  about 10-  15 000 prisoners  and I see Demarek walking by.
And then the rest of the people  who were still prisoners  were taken someplace  is that correct?
Take care of the m by by guard them  dont do anything to them  because theyre prisoners  or shoot them.
I think we did  give them our prisoner names and that was it.
And here the letter part  it suggested that test injections should be given to prisoners; and Himmler had actually had written here  in his own hand  writing \ Dachau. \
Were Jewish prisoners in a  in any way . . .
A man had to disinfect you  prisoners   and we were shy  so shy and so ashamed for the man to disinfect you  with the hose  you know.
I had  I because of my German Yiddish  even in doing combat periods  I was always being used as an interpreter whenever we'd capture German prisoners.
The next morning the head counts and formation and all day and standing there all day  and first contact with other prisoners  come in a bunch of young  well dressed  Polish prisoners  with the armband  black armband with the white letters or white armband with black letters saying Kapo and weird people and to me at 15  the whole thing looked absurd  I mean here was a man who  in a concentration camp  who I got frisked of everything  I could keep my suspenders and my shoes and here he had quite a large  a chronometer  which I only saw in a jewelers shop window in Munkacz.
And I think we were only in Dachau for maybe a day or two or less and we went to Allach  which is a side camp to Dachau.
Now  I find out 86 that this constant moving from one camp to th e other was for the Nazis to save their own skin  because if they wouldnt ha ve had the prisoners to move them around  they would have been compelled to go to the front  and they wanted to save their lives.
And I can remember the French came to take all those prisoners that had been French or -- victims.
It was Wehrmacht  the regular Army and he told us that we are being taken to be 15 exchanged  to the exchange station where they will exchange the German prisoners and we were being loaded on the trucks and taken to the railroad station.
I mean  it was the -- it was handed down from soldier to soldier and from ev -- and we really di -- we spared the -- the old German army  the Wehrmacht  the old army  the Germans  th-they knew they were captured  they were a prisoner and that was it.
Later on  there were gassings in the small gas chamber in Auschwitz and I once was witness  I mean  not to the gassing itself because nobody - only the prisoners who worked - but the block I was on was Number 22 later on  which was the nearest to the 16 crematorium.
Because one opening they would have known what was in it  all these things for the prisoners.
Food was scarce and the food they gave to the prisoners was a hunger ration.
We were 250 men  there must have been 100 SS people with machine guns  everything and we were marched out of the ghetto to a small camp which recently used to be a prisoner of war camp for the Russian prisoners.
The conditions for  in  for prisoners in Mauth ausen were much  much worse than in Auschwitz.
One day  some new transport came with new prisoners  a nd another prisoner was put in that very near me  the machine  working  cutting parts  and it turned out that that was an a SS spy  wanted to know  they already detected  they were  they found out that this weapon  the second stage in impact did not work.
During the war  however  in addition to the regular boarding school  they added one of the wings of the  they took one of the wings of the convent rather   and turned it into a Fresh Air camp for poor children  children whose fathers we re prisoners of war  or whatever .
That unit consisted of a warehouse  which kept in very specifically assigned bags  numbered bags  the personal belongings of the political prisoners non-Jewish  political prisoners who were imprisoned in Auschwitz.
But then  this is now coming to the summer  and the more and more we people were passing by  and some of the trains  the cattle trains full of the prisoners are passing by  and because Jambul was quite a big station  and also the war is going on  so the trucks are needed for soldiers  so these trains are staying  sometimes for a few days  and I would go and look for my father among the thousands of people who are passing  and as king and some people said  oh yes  I knew him.
Uh  they had already been liberated at this point  as we were marching through; and a lot of the prisoners were coming out of the camps.
The function of this unit was to try to find the Germans that were active in Poland during the wa r and were in charge of the concentration camps  were in charge of the forced labor camps   and particularly the ones that were really abusing their power via the prisoners  the people in the camps... because a lot of the construction companies that were working in Poland originated in Bavaria  we ended up going to the offices of the different companies and found the names and addresses of the particular people that were really taking advantage of the power that they had during the war in terms of persecuting and killing some of the prisoners.
And the fellows that are sitting on it are probably very new prisoners because they haven't lost any weight or they don't even look ragged.
And some of them were able to get my father to become a doctor in the camp taking care of the prisoners.
where these prisoners were lying in this room on big mattresses and also sleeping bags which we know weren't theirs and they probably got it from the SS troopers.
How these are successful in breaking the resistance of Ge rmans and prisoners of war.
I remember that there were I guess conversations with some  or there-there must have been some English speaking prisoners there.
Was it -- were there Soviet prisoners in there -- Yeah  yeah -- no  no  no  they -- they got -- What kind of a group was it? --
On the very top were Americans prisoners of war  on the very top.
There was a Russian prisoner of war camp before we came there.
And there was one German SS man and those prisoners  who were nothing but skin and bone  killed him and hung him up on a fence.
Now  in the camp there were some crafts which couldnt be performed by prisoners because they were specialties things which had to be done.
There were really no arrangements--and I'm not complaining I recognizing that there were no arrangements to take care of us or the hundreds of other prisoners that were liberated in the camp in Woeblin.
But you have thousands of Polish troops in the Soviet Union prisons.
Yes  the prisoners were creatures   yes  and the SS men looked  and once he come  look  back in the blocks.
They would put them in prison which was on -- I recall that prison being called .
For the next nine months or so  I went from work detail to work detail  including work inside the barrack  until in April 1944  I was recruited to work in the ﬁSaunaﬂ -- the more correct designation being disinfection facility  where civilians were transformed into prisoners.
Did any of the other prisoners resent you for being in this or not?
Well  they wanted something to eat  so they were eating American rations  and so on  and but but the thing is  a lot of those people couldnt even walk  they didnt know wher e they were from  they didnt know what they were gonna see when they got home  and the this Interview with Norman Coulson October 4  2013 28the roads were just fi-filled with people all over the place  and the ro other ca other prisoners in other camps  they were also let go.
I am st all prisoners  you know  so I know things.
There were some cases wh ere I think some of the prisoners perhaps tried to call attention to some of the -- maybe some of the Nazi guards who had put on a prisoner uniform to try to get out.
They were called kapos and these were German criminals who were told that in order to avoid jail or execution they would have to be guards at the camp.
And as a matter of fact  he was also one of the victims  but of another in Vicovnya   which recently was opened up on the Russian  near Kiev  that it was the prisoners  who were not prisoners of war  but prisoners who were taken to full prisons.
And as soon as we saw the first tank coming we put up our hands and we were just hoping that they wouldn't start firing  because prisoners get sh ot sometimes too  even if you give up.
At that point the Swedish Red Cross had sent packages for the prisoners.
And one day at n -- noon -- before noon -- before noon at the factory  over the loudspeaker came an announcement  all prisoners assemble where we usually assemble after the shift to go back.
Well from there which was a huge camp we was moved out to Auschwitz. [
Did you have relationships with non-Jewish pr isoners  as well as Jewish prisoners?
And during the time you were there  did those former prisoners leave  or did they ste They were told to they were told to leave  yeah  because we didnt want them there.
She said  you know  he insisted on embracing  hugging each one of the prisoners.
And he had -- he had been in Sibe ria  and he said the only reason he survived was because he was a doctor and they needed him to take care of the prisoners.
Everybody who had TB wa s sent to a sanitorium  and the -- the medical staff of  I guess the military  took care of the prisoners.
Once when we were waiting the for the Russians to let us in  I interrogated German prisoners.
and his view of the prisoners versus -- or were these prisoners  were these criminals  who were these people?
There was prisoners of war  Russians  Soviets  you know  Ukrainians  whatever.
So thats where yours was stamped  not inside here  but on your arm It depends well  all prisoners have here  here  here  or here.
Because as described in a book  she was then put on a Death March as the prisoners were gradually moved back west.
When it was finished  it was supposed to be a show camp--how...how humanely the American prisoners of war are being treate d. This camp was doing construction.
Well  naturally they -- they -- everybody who gets attacked or something like this  always says something to defend themselve  but the -- the main issue was that they said  you know  ﬁWe were just prisoners like you and somebody had to do it  and we were selected  so we had to do it.ﬂ But  you know  theres a difference  like the same thing with the Germans  that you can do somethi ng  and you can do it two ways.
The first day was quite terrible  because -- at first because we didnt know anything  and then we had to go to the -- to the -- to different places  disinfection  barber  shaving  the shower  and -- and this uniform  you know  this -- for prisoners  which went approximately.
My experience at the main camp in Auschwitz lasted only about thirty-six hours  enough time for the conversion of civilians into prisoners.
In some instance you had couples were political prisoners  they were not as bad.
During the day we saw exercises in the courtyard where they were exercising the prisoners  Jewish prisoners  and they were beating them and torturing them with sticks.
There were Communists  you know  prisoners who mostly  Austrian Communists and some German Communists and they say they formed.
They had taken out the Jewish and Russian prisoners to Ninth Fort and they dig...dug trenches.
of the Jews  you know  and -- in fact  the pogroms started right away  as you know  because the Ukrainians blamed the Jews for the -- for some of their prisoners who were -- who were killed by the -- by the Russians  by the NKVD  but they blamed the Jews for it.
Uh as you started moving d eeper into Europe  did you start hearing about anything  about what was happening uh to the prisoners?
They knew the way we looked  the way we were dressed  still in these prisoners' clothes.
We began to learn that there were uh train loads of uh of uh prisoners 4 being moved from one location to another  one concentration camp to another.
It was from the  I have it somewhere  from the union   from the Union of Former Political Concentration Camp Prisoners  and political prisoners.
What they did in in Nuremberg was was a was a crime that they sent us to jail for for for participation of th is uh uh...we did it out out of our good heart and and even helped the th e prisoners there  so as I say  I'm not very happy but it's water over the dam.
And th-the other [indecipherable] the other half  they were German prisoners of war.
But a-at the -- at the time when things started to come to a end in Auschwitz  they allowed the prisoners to mingle with the -- with the spi -- Sonderkommando with the special detail and he told me that -- that my -- that my mother was -- was burned and I got that information from some other people as well.
They put in an informer who took care of all the prisoners.
It was a very effective dig...disguise and uh very effective in putting psychological pressure on prisoners.
And he perused -- and he found documents that he had branch fact ories in Austria and in Germany where he used prisoners from concentration camp.
And the Germans had the Nazis the crazy idea that somehow if they moved all of the prisoners from other camps  that somehow they could congregate them there in Bavaria.
27 Special commando (German); A commando of Jewish prisoners in the six extermination camp selected to work in the gas chambers and crematoria.
I suppose the men must have been enrolled in the Army and maybe taken prisoners by the Germans.
There were some  I understand  some French prisoners of war were there  and maybe a few Czechs  and so and so.
I had very strong feelings that if you're part of the system using slave labor why  you know you can't fall back on the business that I was nice to the prisoners any more than you could say it was superior orders.
So and so -- I know so and so participated in the murder of 350 prisoners on the day that the camp was evacu ated.
And then my father -- turned out that he was with the Polish unit that came out of Russia le gally a fter Stalin allowed some po litical prisoners out.
Some were in their bunks  they were they were stacked bunks.
So they kind of machine gunned along the line of the prisoners.
A lot of Germans  the guards  including the prisoners  were killed  a lot of them.
So  between the local left overs that were involved and between the retreating armies  those who didn't want to become prisoners of war  this is where they choose that life.
By the time we landed there in 1945  it was maybe 10 times that many prisoners.
Tried to find out from other prisoners what happened in the rest of the world  because we didn't know how long we would last  how long Hitler would last  what would happen in the end.
Because the reeducation in camp was not uh occ upied by regular sur-uh prisoners like we were sentenced forever  because we had no hope or how long uh  there was no timetable for us.
And the doctor was there that did all the experiments on these prisoners  poor souls  and theyre treated like animal s. Animals are better treated than these people were.
35 Voluntarily (German) 36 In a later conversation the interviewee clarified that he had meant to say ﬁPW.ﬂ 37 commando (German) 38 Forman (colloquial German); term used for inmates appointed by the SS to head a labor Kommando of prisoners.
Well anyway  what happened then was that  lets see  about 1944  about February  the Germans got a whole bunch of Russian war pr prisoners of war  and they were starting to dig up thats what we heard from other people  I didnt see it that they were digging up the bodies  putting them in piles and setting them on fire.
Were there any attempts that you noticed to retaliate against them by prisoners?
The only screaming I remember was from the guards and the prisoners who had to get us out of the boxcars  because it was a matter of you didn't walk  you ran.
Thousands of miles they used to march when the Germans...the Russian used to advance  so they didn't want to leave the prisoners.
So if was a Czech  there came different  they were prisoners of war.
was a few of time by  but by the end of war  Germans were more lenient  when it comes to the  allowing families   prisone rs and prisoners them self to communicate between them self.
You know  you had people who came out of the concentration camps.
Yes  and the Russians and the prisoners of war and so.
Did you  in terms of the feedi ng of the prisoners  were you told to not feed the prisoners or did you just learn this by -- We learned it  we learned it.
So this is the way  but we were sure  if he would find this prisoners who make this organization  gold or something very valuable  he would give hi m slip and he would sew in pocket.
And after their the show  th at they were putting up a show in the theater  they were saying  the reason we are entertaining  and were going around the country is to let you know that the Russian people are taking prisoners for work.
Later on matter of fact  I think when the German war machine was slowing down and they called up some of the German prisoners  the German prisoners were called up to the German Army and they apparently formed some special units.
A. That bread used to belong to them and then this bread was collected and then distributed among the prisoners.
There was one big stupid looking guard  and he was accused of maltreating the Jewish prisoners  and he actually said  he said  ﬁWell  this woma n  you see ﬂ he said  ﬁI was under orders  I had to kick her ﬂ he said  ﬁbut I didnt kick her nearly as hard as  I was tryi ng to kick her as little asﬂ.. It was  all the way down the line that was the attitude that they did it as little as possible to survive.
The first thing I noticed  that instead of the green of the criminals they had red triangles of political prisoners.
So the prisoners that were stationed in Mauthausen were dying there on a daily basis just from hard labor.
And this was a very small camp  it was a sub-camp of Mauthausen  about 2000 prisoners  maybe a hundred guards and a small squad of guards with canines  about 15 of them.
But in the morning  they retreated and the second and third evening  they were prisoners  taken prisoners.
They were afraid that they would be called into the army and the Germans are right behind them and we heard already that they were catching up with the Polish army and some they are taking as prisoners and some they ar e killing.
Did you talk to any of the prisoners while you were walking around?
Not knowing that hospitals have certain rooms with bars for prisoners.
I mean  it must have been an enormous amount of prisoners that passed on.
No.... SWB: JOE KAHOE: We We knew that they were pris eh we thought that they were just regular Polish or German or Jewish or Polish or Jewish prisoners and we we knew who what they were.
It appeared to be an enormous problem and it appeared even more so as we learned of the extent of these camps and th e deprivations that the prisoners had undergone during that.
May God be merciful of his  of over over his mortal soul immort al soul.ﬂ So I know one saw one atrocity committed by the former prisoners.
And they had nothing whatsoever to do with those people who worked in the clothing barrack  because there were clothes -- clothing and shoes  and linen -- not linen  clothing  shoes  some underwear  some head covers for the prisoners only  yeah.
There was  it was getting it a little warmer  spring was coming and then  as us ual  an evacuation of the prisoners started again  so people were put in the and pushed outside to start walking again on the road and fortunately I  I didn't make that one.
So finally  a couple of years  when they had all those prisoners around  then...meant that we go to the railroad.
And so  uh  no  it had nothing order came  also this number and so on and we came on a block in the Auschwitz main camp when we were uh  vetoed to these people  Polish people  look  you took from us away thes e things  and we are old prisoners  so you cannot handle us as we are so low in camp.
But there were German prisoners of war who were working the commiss ary at the army camp  Camp Patrick Henry in Newport News  Virginia .
Anyway we opened this and it was a great success because we   we named the place you know that  the place would be at Auschwitz  former Auschwitz prisoners.
I learned that in my life how difficult it is -- what starvation really mean s. So I will say this experience with my prisoners  my 800 prisoners  which little by little I had to deal with  that nobody ever revealed on me.
Before morning he came back and said  ﬁNow you can go back there and be one of the prisoners.
Put these prisoners in barracks and barracks and barracks  you know.
The war was over in ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 17 some sense.
Me and two Russian prisoners walked in deep in the forest.
And eventually we got these young German prisoners of war to help us as ward men.
The trip on that big shipping boat  which must have held at least 1 000 prisoners was a very long time.
It means that th ey should clean  they should help when the prisoners  deportees  came.
There was a place where we used to gas the clothes  a place for showers  because the prisoners used to come in about once a month or whatever  you know  for lousing.
And they gave me  as a youngster to the blue policemen  and they put me in jail.
So in the evening I went to see my friends  the French prisoners of war that I met with my friends.
Toward the end of the war  a group of German prisoners was being brought in and uh when I uh interrogated them  one of them quite uh freely admitted that he had recently come from Berlin  that he had been Hitler's chauffeur  and that he  he had been present uh at the time when Hitler committed suicide.
Were there lots of conflic ts between one group of prisoners and another group from one country to the next  you know -- Like -- between us?
How was he buried  did he have a priest?ﬂ Janko  with probably 500 others  next day  was dumped into big wagon  that about 50 prisoners pushed and pulled.
And as I say  at first we were sort of interned in Bergen-Belsen and then we were still treated as prisoners because the tr ansport was very small and of the things that happened when we arrived in the camp.
But then I heard a lot of stories about prisoners back here that German prisoners that were pretty well treated some back here  Ill tell you.
So say the...the...the Haftlings  the prisoners  uh claime d that I was working for him.
And on this elipse roa d  yes  they make  they put about three hundred  three hundred uh prisoners with carts  hand carts  yes.
The first floor  where we were -- we were billeted in our sleep ing rooms and also our working offices  but we were trying to find private billets outside of the compound so we could go home at night after work  so we wouldnt be in the same building with the prisoners.
We collected quite a number of them prisoners of war and the prisoners were tied  their hands in the back and were immediately sent to the forest  and which  later on  they would stand trial and they were convicted  in other words to die.
They were all -- there were Poles  there were Gypsies  there were political prisoners  all sorts of people there that -- you know  undesirable.
And two of the prisoners  who lived also in this cell  they worked in the prison kitchen and as such they were able to -- well  they had more food but they were not allowed -- they couldn't and they were afraid to bring any food  but what they did bring they brought always in the evening to the cell  whole pot of coffee.
So  alarm  and they ran into forest with the prisoners  and this guy was left there.
And what the Germans did  it was -- it made no sense to transport Jewish prisoners  and to lose the war.
Now there are prisoners coming and going every week  other people coming  new peopl e and other people going home back to work  and mostly young ones I tried to help.
So when you happened upon this camp your idea o f what youre seeing is what You know Im a little confused about prisoners of  German prisoners of war that were huddled together in trucks and they were carrying  they were driven away from where they were captured and prisoners of war and concentration camp prisoners in the striped uniforms in trucks.
So they put him into a POW camp for the German prisoners.
Because my work was really just in the office  in there with Alfons and some of the other people that were prisoners of the Germans  who worked on the water and sewer lines and things like that.
It was in the summer of 1943 and they unloaded us on the main road in the camp where we saw across the road British and Russian prisoners still finishing the barracks.
They had people in the barracks  they had people -- Germans  they had Russians who pr eceded us to Buchenwald.
He is the on e who coached us on how to get information out of the prisoners  he was a -- an expert in that kind of thing.
Maybe that was just a little differences between like French prisoners  English -- we had some English prisoners  too.
The Jewish prisoners were not transported to the -- to the Dachau itself.
And I could stay in Garmisch until we moved to a special house for the former prisoners of  uh  from the concentration camps in [Munau ] . [
And so the SS  I hear what they say  ﬁWe going put the prisoners there and we going to have a rest for one or two days.ﬂ Because  I think  they was tired  too.
Note the mess kits  and the regular fare that prisoners -- prisoner of -- prisoners of war are consuming by rules of Geneva Convention  1600 calories  no more  no less.
But at that moment when I was there  the Russian soldiers were there  prisoner  also sneaked out and we went to the forest.
So the prisoners of war decided they'll make a run for it.
The Jewish workers were outside  the British war prisoners  10 of them  outside.
And so  once somebody mentioned gas chamber  I knew the whole story  I mean I knew where  what it's about and then we were standing in this courtyard and just standing there naked and standing and standing and waiting and then come in two prisoners with numbers tattoos on their forearms.
Uh...I heard that some prisoners who could walk around...uh...did get some...some SS men didn't get out and they did put them in a barrack  and the British were guarding them.
The -- the door was always open for the flax to be thrown in  which was also done by girls  and some French prisoners brought the heavy bundles.
He gave that that the Polish people knew what happened to these prisoners of war.
The lodging was  we were lying on the ground with a little bit of straw as a mattress and one blanket for each person.
The green triangle wa s -- I think yellow was -- was -- was criminal  and there was some religious prisoners down there  because everybody had a sign on them.
In fact  I was talking to you  Im I was jumping from one camp to another  the killing  the shooting  th-the some of the of the prisoners are collapsing and I see them ba b-being hit.
According to Arolsen  Longwy-Thil was opened on June 19  1944 and closed in early September 1944--at which time  all of the prisoners were evacuated e ither to Kochendorf (in a transport sent September 1  1944) or to Buchenwald/Dernau (in a transport sent September 4  1944).
One of the prisoners was not a copple which was so bad  but he was also was a winner of a German medal during the Firs t World War and was somewhat respected by the SS.
But we did convince Andrews finally to let us do our -- our thing  as long as the prisoners didnt violate any of the rules hed go along with it  but 56 that was one of the challenges.
And th e prisoners of war were at least a mile away.
This -- The Jewish prisoners interationta was not sent to Auschwitz.
And as we got the coffee  they were shooting at the legs of the prisoners.
And so what I felt I had to do when I was appointed from Berlin to this sp ecial situation  to supervise the visits my Scandinavian political prisoners got  I felt not only do I have to supervise there my way  that's not enough.
Did you get to know any of the othe r prisoners as closely as you did... No.
We were free to visit other prisoners in  in Bergen Belsen.
In the meantime  I believe  April 7  he decided to organize the evacuation  not of everybody  but of a large group of prisoners from Buchnwald  and he moved even the first part I remember went to Kaminetyz by train  but in Kaminetyz there were Americans started bombarding the transportation communication.
You see  because  all the other camps were liberated by  by the army... Tell me about that.
And as I said  I was five months and on April the 4  1941  in the afternoon the whole prison population was called out in into the yard  and there were already tables set up and the Gestapo people were there with lists and they called the names of different prisoners.
And this group was held there while the Germans were negotiating with the allies in exchange of the German prisoners of war for these Jews  and also some war material.
Came to our line where I was standing  and picked prisoners at random for what they called it \ Sonderkommando\ --a special commando.
Started to actually interrogate me like I was one of the prisoners  one of the Nazis  the way he was going about it.
In a hospital  they had there a barrack from the prisoners of war  about 20 of us or 24 I don't remember.
They took us out  more than half  but Auschwitz got 60 000 people  prisoners.
And of course  to be liberated by the Russians  but I I didnt know that  but five days before  at the camp gates  arrived hundreds of trucks  American army trucks  to pick up American prisoners of war  and English an-and and the western allies.
We took a few  we took a few prisoners and interrogated them.
It was a scheme from the Germans  it was called Hotel Polski that was was an old fanc y hotel in Warsaw  and what the Germans did  they spread rumors that they're going to send people to Switzerland and that these Jews were going to be exchanged for German prisoners of war with Russia  and they were looking for Jews to come to this hotel an d they will transport these Jews to Switzerland.
And as I said  we had ordinary German prisoners who delivered -- who prepared the food and -- and serve it.
He had taken -- he -- as he left the camp  he had given his jacket  his overcoat  everything he had to the prisoners that were left  that would never come home.
And a lot of prisoners polished bricks because those buildings  and I happen to be  for a reason that I don't know why  but I was on the demolition team and we had to plant dynamite  dynamite they called it  underneath the walls.
A barrack that counted twelve hundred prisoners on Sunday would be half empty by the next Sunday.
And they explained to him that if he allows the American trucks to cross the line  they will they can liberate all of the prisoners  and the German didnt want  obviously  to Interview with Julian Kulski September 25   2014 102 have the western prisoners fall into Russian hands  the way that the western allies didnt  so he agreed to it.
But they were not like us  they was a a was war prisoners they were treated differently like us.
They were -- but we were mainly looking for th e companionship of poli tical prisoners  because those who were professional prostitutes  were not very attractive to us  they were different  was an different -- different category of people.
Other men went in and so-called \ liberated\  the camps and the prisoners.
So prisoners  I don't know what  bu t I feel we were worse than slaves because slaves are not condemned to die  you know?
And I can imagine that the prisoners couldnt understand  now if youre liberated us  how come you dont let us go?
And  uh  we arrived in the middle of the night  the fourth night and was...you know  bright lights  and the doors opened  and the blue and white striped prisoners which were the prisoners from Kanada which we did not know Kanada existed.
Its a big sabotag e [indecipherable] and all the -- to -- young kids  they said they worked with -- for a ye -- they worked for police  they worked  you know  from 98 the ghetto they went out to work to the police  railroad police  those who carried the prisoners and thing  or my people are [indeci pherable] to the camps  or those prison -- those have a police force  they have a police force and they worked for them.
There were a lot of German political prisoners  that were against the Nazis.
These were political prisoners   anti -Semitic   but decided for the duration of the hostilities that didn't matter.
And so he gets on this bicycle and he bicycled off to the front and got taken prisoners.
There was a lot  very unfortunate what I seen in the camp among prisoners.
Did that mean that there were -- you were -- there were at least 17 212 prisoners?
And over there we had all kind of international people  prisoners from different countries.
We had a common...together the same visa  the enter visa to Romania--those prisoners and seventeen of us.
And the Russians  maybe they knew we were told of some concentration camps.
And every once in a while  as I aforementioned in my other chapters  was that we located some prisoners.
It was a medium size camp  capable of holding perhaps several thousand prisoners  but at the time of my arrival there were be tween thirty and forty thousand prisoners there  most of them evacuees from camps further east.
It were much more that we talked  not uh we couldn't sit talk uh like I'm talking to you because there were SS guards around it  and they would not like prisoners to converse.
Rest of the prisoners was Polish  Czechs  Ge rmans  Hungarians  we had some French  few British  three of us American citizens was there and Spanish  Spanish was there.
They brought us to Hanover and when we disembarked in Hanover  we were told thats the British zone of occupation  that the Britishers are returning the bolts and the Soviet prisoners of war back to Soviet Union.
Well  he didnt say may much of it at all  you know  they were just guarding the war prisoners  you know  they didnt do anything else  you know  just stand guard around.
So they got in with us as war prisoners; and that's funny but that's what th ey did.
Not to protect the pr isoners  but to make sure that in case a bomb hit someplace the prisoners couldnt run away.
There were approximately in that house probably a hundred prisoners of war and about 20 nurses.
He probably did his duties  but he shou ld at understand better  with Jewish prisoners where he sent  and took three days to found.
And they really I told them that these were all Jewish people and that they were being persecuted.
Besides that  even if we did succeed  what would you do with the thousand of prisoners?
And after three or four days  it seems like an eternity  they sent us to a camp which was being built by Russian soldiers--by Russian prisoners of war camp.
Did you and other prisoners talk about getting even while you were there.
Some drivers from us  so me of our prisoners -- we had a car -- took him in the car  took him to the Swiss border.
Also because of the three people that I told you that had escaped our ghetto  word came that the underground was being formed  that the Russian prisoners of war that escaped and a few Jews who managed to escape had banded together and became a resistance.
No  because sun -- they had to be recognized as prisoners  yeah.
And wh en they got home  they send me a parcel with mens underwear  for the French prisoners.
Even though each car  each uh section was supposed to hold four or eight prisoners  they put sixteen and uh they gave us rations of about two hundred grams of uh dry bread used to get about ten grams of sugar  .
And one used to give me  or gave me a little piece of and he said  when the French prisoners go on to be freed  and I brought them sometimes a little extra bread that I had  I always organized things  I always knew where to get things or steal things  or God knows what.
And I believe above all  when we are talking about the prisoners  just look what he did at that time  playing into the hands of Khomeini wi th Iran.
He was one of the first prisoners and he was an architect in the camp and he talked with the Arbeitgenes  thats the S ecretary of the Labor and in a couple of days I was in a cabinet shop.
He was a Jewish fellow  and Garfinkel could speak Yiddish and German and uh  we used to uh  have Garfinkel come over and interview German prisoners and he delighted in speaking Yiddish to them and uh  of course they could do nothing  nothing about it  but we we never controlled that type of thing.
Today well let everyone in  including prisoners from Cuba  including terrorists.
When we st opped at that place  we were some of the prisoners were digging with their spoons.
P.S. Just in case you can't find that other more detaile d letter  these murdered men were political prisoners of every nationality and were murdered simply because they appeared to be too tired to continue the march successfully.
Were they escaping  or were they Interview with William Hunley February 21  2014 29 Yes  whatever ever th-th-they well  when when they re-realized that we were moving in  they marched the prisoners out for 60 miles or so.
They did everything tobut open the factory  so they -- the prisoners organized cultural evening for the 21 st of January  Sunday.
Well  I took him over to the back  and he  together with other German prisoners  did some helping in the military kitchen  and d-digging up passages underground.
By the way  this camp had a lot of Russian prisoners and they had high officers that lived separated from everybody else.
So they were afraid that something will happen  so they and and the Russian  a lot of Russian prisoners run away.
They werent they just werent taking any prisoners alive any more.
There USHMM Archives RG -50.030*0145 5 were Jewish people and the...and the Jewish prisoners and the Germans and the Lithuanians told them to undig them all.
It was a small place  we were 500 prisoners and these people from Smolensk told us that the ghetto in Smolensk has been closed.
In the meantime  the car doors were opened and masses of prisoners were milling around on the platform.
Do you remember any specific advice you were given by people who had been there longer  or any advice that you would then give to new prisoners?
When we walked up the mountain a man who looked to me like he was the mayor of Zeaphant [ph100]  I dont know ma ybe not  but an official in either case  stopped us and said that Austria is no longer at war and as far as hes concerned we are no longer prisoners; the war is over and we should be free  except since Austria didnt do anything to us he cannot feed us.
Interview with Anthony Chudzik January 24  2015 102 Okay  so you were the prisoners  and they were the guards.
You know  the prisoners; so they could take the shoes away  or whatever.
And so they didnt have enough room to take prisoners to Russia  and they would shoot the prisoners and throw them through the wi ndows of the of the prison  and from what I know from eyewitnesses  that they were one level  or two levels high  dead bodies  the Russians killed some of the things.
So the prisoners put tattoo number here  here  or here; it depends on the SS officer on on On duty?
And the the prisoners worked in the quarries  getting the cement or wha wi wi the w-with wi which would be the cement that they would be making.
Like one time I remember I was picked out to go with one of the SS and a couple of other prisoners to the nearest village of the camp.
But I dont remember t oo many details  but what one of the prisoners was a an artist and he painted my portrait.
And I told them that because upstairs we had several prisoners  all Nazis  that norma lly you're taught to hold the weapon up and unload it.
You have to remember a bowl of watery soup with some leaves or some piece of potato in it for two people who each one of them equipped with his own spoon and and this was ready made for conflict and combat and and and and uh the the spilling of soup and so on  but somehow before I arrived a a custom was developed over there 13 where the two prisoners  skeleton-looking hungary prisoners who would be given this bowl of soup to share  would feed each other  so if you gave me half a spoon  I gave you half a spoon.
I mean  there was a -- a f -- couple o-of prisoners work in the camp office  and they we re the one that wo -- w -- ha -- have access to information such as that.
But somehow one of the prisoners heard on a radio or whatever it was  that president Roosevelt died  so I think he died in early April.
There were thousands of prisoners coming out of...uh coming into and out of the camp.
Interview with Bernard Pasternak October 22  1997 9 Were you a witness to any acts of retribution or retaliation against the former prisoner for against the former guards or against collaborators  by the prisoners or by the allies who came and liberated you?
I went to a place in Germany  a concentration camp where all the prisoners were already taken out.
There were barracks  wooden barracks in which there were great crowds of prisoners uh sleeping on kind of a three tier shelves.
You know  so they had the same thing in France and the French actually did make German prisoners.
These were the aids of the blockaltester the prisoners who prepared the food  who they kept for cleanness  who punished  yes  who were very severe to the  and they were aid of the - there were about four or five these prisoners  stubnitz.
But then at the end  some of the people from my home town who had been old prisoners  because the old prisoners  you know  it was . . .
So thats how pe ople knew what their jobs were  because the Germans didnt want and I dont know what I want to say here they didnt want to they didnt want their their buddies to n to know what they were what they were doing when these pe when the pri the prisoners were there.
We then moved on out of the camp  leaving the prisoners behind.
Finally  given the uh  time limit  I arranged for to get SS prisoners  we had an SS cage.
The guards told her that the only people that are in this camp are political prisoners who are against the German Reich and I told her this isnt true.
Here's a little...little Jewish prisoners  you know  but I was liberated and he was right now  he would shoot you and run  you know.
And then  the Americans kept those who wanted to stay in the hospital  in the hospital  plus they set up a tent  a hospital tent  where they also kept prisoners.
I guess we we assumed that that was going to be trading for German prisoners  you know  that were we captured or something.
In the later years we didnt see Russian prisoners brought through Iasi any more.
It so happened that I was on a patrol that took the first German prisoners.
They took all the prisoners who were looking like skeletons  or half skeletons  got them away from there  right in the ovens.
And they had differe nt insignias  which I learned there designated whether they were political prisoners or murder ers.
They also released all the political prisoners who had been put in prison because they kille d  like this Chancellor Dollfuss  who was killed.
Once a transport left the camp  no one assumed the respon sibility for provisioning the prisoners of that transport  except perhaps for providing the initial rations.
And of course  there was among prisoners - when you were an old prisoner you were also trusted.
They were Gentile but for some reason I  you dont know why they  why they Called prisoners.
That we were tattooed with the serial numb er of the prisoners and not just  you 42 know like the Prussia people for ex ample  had an A dash and some number.
He had all those those all that mess  those smashed prisoners there.
And I shouted down Raus  Juden en dar and that became a big story becau se this was the first time that the brigade had taken German prisoners.
So somehow my activities with the Fr ench prisoners of war became known  not to the point where they prosecuted me immediately or looked for me  but it became known.
132 Yeah  in the beginning  but then there were no Russian uniforms more  so they have taken -- while sorting the stuff which they have taken away from the newcomers  the good stuff went to Germany  into the Reich  and the less -- th-th -- those which looked more cheap and -- and not so good  were then supplied the beglidinskammer  the clothing barrack  and were stored there  and distributed to other Jewish newcomers  while the non-Jewish newcomers received the striped clotheses.
And was the majority of people in Vught Jewish  and then the rest of you were political prisoners?
It seems that when Mussolini was hanged he was the soldiers in the Italian army had a choice of either joining the German army or becoming prisoners of war.
There were these people in uniforms -- striped uniforms  which were prisoners which we didn't know because they acted nasty.
Who were the workers  the ot her prisoners in this camp?
And and tw o prisoners fell in love with my aunts  and they married my aunts  and when the revolution of Russia started  the war with the Interview with A. Zalc  L. Ragin  J. Mizrachi July 23  2009 5Germans and Russians stopped  because the Germans made the Russian revolution  I dont know if you know th at  yeah.
So  I dont know  I guess the people in Dachau I mean in in the yeah  the town of Dachau thought that was just a training camp for the SS there.
We we re going  and running and running with my son and so we put off this prisoners' clothes a nd underneath we have a good civil organized from Kanada  and so it was night  it was curfew  and we  we saw a pit and in this pit there was this colony of miners.
So I came there in 1947  ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 10 from one war to another.
They were completely disillusioned  of course  because they were really prisoners of the system.
Uh there the Red Cross sent a memorandu m to their delegation in Germany in which uh they left it to the decision of the delegation if they should uh submit to the German authorities uh a request for the extension of the basic rules of Red cross protection to the intern...interned people in the various camps and not in the camps of prisoners of war and the other camps.
So I have to emphasize that I was a little too young  even though after the war  we were considered political prisoners  but really  there was no real ideological reason because I didn't understand national socialism as I woul d understand it today.
And there was head of the room  he was prisoners too  Cz ech.
>> Bill Benson: You arrived at Auschwitz with your mother  your sister  and your grandmother.
Well  one of the prisoners whose identity had matched one of th ese six men was changed and was just about to die.
In this camp was were some non-Jewish prisoners  they were not the same prisoners as we were  but they were still prisoners.
Now we had a very secret place  whose name I still dont know   right here in Washington  where we brought German prisoners of war who knew inside info rmation on a very high ranking -- well  anyhow  my assignment was a really exciting one.
So they were trying to get them on trucks and taking them to the gas chamber.
In my opinion there were there not less than 3 or 4 thousand prisoners.
Ziereis and his son  ah  used to practice on prisoners  target practice  getting ready for the hunting season.
Believe me  at the end of the day  they looked as raggedy as most of the prisoners.
They shoved us into the huge brick building  and there were prisoners and SS telling us what to do next.
There were a lot of non Jewish prisoners there  political prisoners  Dutch  French  Belgium  Poles  mostly Western Europeans.
He said  ﬁThis is where yo ure going to live  and thats also where youre going to work.ﬂ And I asked him  ﬁWhat kind of a place is this?ﬂ And he said  ﬁWell  its an interrogation center  its a wa -- interrogating prisoners of war.ﬂ So I assumed this is continuation of what weve been doing at the -- at Revan  at DIC.
And thereby enhance our reputation among the prisoners of war  because we would not only interview them we couldn t interview everybody who was being captured  there were too many people being captured.
American prisoners and Russian prisoners and Polish prisoners-of-war; they had it a little easier  a little better.
They kind of want ed to hear about the Edelweisspiraten  my contact with French prisoners of war and my membership in the Hitler Youth and why I had done that  and one of them seemed to be a little -- what's the word I'm looking for?
Barbed wire where they used to put the prisoners in when they first came off the train.
That's how much more crowded the bunks were on top of each other whereas we only had bunks on the floor.
During my imprisonment in Gleiwitz  I had electric car where I was transporting those scales and the women would work on at service those machines  Jewish women prisoners  and I had...I I was the only one from the from the few men...I could talk to Jewish girls which was a...and I would befriend my wife.
He was a very short man and he had two fellow prisoners who were giants compared to him.
We found an old bakery and we got some prisoners who had been bakers before and (laughing) you won't believe this  but you know all the Hullaballoo these days about oat bread and oats and all that sort of thing.
This was later  from the French police  when they ask I said that I'm a Francophile who has paid for his sympathy to the French prisoners with time in a concentration camp and so on .
And this is how 4 Foreman (German); term used in concentration camps for prisoners appointed by SS to supervise labor squads.
20 End of Tape #2 21 Tape #3 Tell me what it meant to be one of the older prisoners in camp.
They were the Jewish prisoners that had they had them separated from us.
He told us he was in the British Brigade  and while we were in Lvov  he sent us a letter which came to us from Marseilles: to be ready to go to Odessa because his job is to repatriate Russian prisoners of war  to repatriate the–prisoners of war  so if we can make Od essa he'll smuggle us on a ship for us to go with him back  get out of the Soviet Union.
But if I think back in Berlin of the German prisoners we took  I didn't have that feeling for some strange reason.
And when the war started the first prisoners of war in Majdanek were Russians and they said the Germans said that they are not Russians just prisoners  but they are commissars.
I remember getting one or two packages  but I do remember that  because I was worki ng with this flax  and I was wearing my coat  at that point we were not given any of the prisoners uniforms  we were weari ng our own clothing.
My daughter  she had a time when she we nt to the university  after she spoke to Nuta   she came we lived in England at that at that time  and she had to do this essay about prisoners.
As you may notice I haven't gotten into any of the gory things about brothers had to hang brothers if they knew it  and lots of beatings right in front of the prisoners when there was roll call.
Men once  to te ll you about the -- there were girls in another camp and they went home and they had contact w ith the French prisoners  more contact  because the camp of the French prisoners was near.
There was a patrol of 82nd Airborne soldiers inside the camp  standing among these mountains of bodies and thousand or two thousand crazy prisoners jumping and hugging each other and kissing each other and uh I really didn't feel it.
Bu t  I'm not one of your prisoners \  he said. \
This was my reaction  but the following day  I have to take all those prisoners who came in a day before to the hospital for checkups  and I let them know in the evening  there is this and this man who killed a prisoner  so the especially took care already the hospital.
But there was a b -- there was a big quantity of hi -- of prisoners  strong  who didnt do anything at all.
7) Wooden clogs  of the type prisoners were fo rced to wear in labor camps.
There were German soldiers who went AWOL and were like prisoners under guard.
But we got to Buchenwald  and right away started to take out prisoners out in the fields and shooting them.
One day the SS came to our barrack and said  \ Jew s  Poles  Germans  any prisoners  out of the barrack.
She knew there were Russian prisoners of war that managed to escape the Germans who mistreated them badly and formed themselves into a resistance to slow the progress of the Nazis to the front lines.
German) 3 Joachim von Ribbentrop 4 Vyacheslav Molotov 5 Muslim (German); camp term used to refer to prisoners who had lost the will to live and were near death.
When you first got there  we re there prisoners who had been there longer who would give you advice?
I'm not sure if it was the same day or the next day  there was no Germans still not in Kovno  but the Lithuanian right wingers opened the jail and let out all prisoners from the jail.
laughter) I had to play my game because not only did I have to save my beloved prisoners but also my own life  the life of my siblings at st ake.
only political prisoners  or the the Jewish  they had them change their Okay.
And there is an incident where Napoleon killed the prisoners of war in in Akah  in in today Israel  at that time Turkish Palestine.
He wore a yellow armband with black lettering on which is it says  ---Elderstedt  and then there was some other  you know  prisoners in striped uniforms with armbands.
And there the SS commandant when we came in he asked  we were very dirty and in a long transport for the day  he asked  the kapos  where do these prisoners come from?
And  uh  then naturally  when I came in  people surrounded me  prisoners.
Lets face it  and he may have been a womanizer  but the important thi ng about Oscar Schindler is he didnt touch one of the prisoners.
They succeeded because eventually the SS started to organize  together with the prisoners.
that we were representatives of the camp Gestapo  or the political department and that these two prisoners are needed for interrogation.
As I told you a few prisoners were se nt to some places at the beginning we didn't know exactly where we are sending.
And you just wonder I used to wonder about how can people be so cruel  and just youre already prisoners  you know  why make it even worse?
He apparently could not follow us  and he had 29 Russian prisoners with him.
You visit all the prisoners  listen to what they have to say  keep a file of what y ou hear  and well coordinate that with our interrogation reports.
And down in the military government and in the county  I had a lot of contact with Germans.
We put in a...a...a pot with the string down and the Polish prisoners put in some...uh...meat or whatever  sausage  and we threw out the money.
I got typhus and when I get out of it there was no more prisoners in in the camp.
Then they crammed us into a cell which must have been very small  and there were already some prisoners and with us included  there was barely room to sit.
And they and then had a thing and they were trying to invite the pr us prisoners to join them and fight against the Russians.
So after that I  not only Polish but al so Czechs and German prisoners were dying.
37 And he was -- he was one of the Jewish prisoners  is that right?
She was ordered to report to the laundry and wash clothing for the Nazis or clothing for the prisoners.
So you -- At that point you are not interacting with any of the prisoners?
The camp was under th e control  obviously  of the Br itish Army  but they had a lot of Hungarian soldiers who we re prisoners of war as it were  who were used to work in the camp doing various jobs.
No doubt these were very important   because you know  we could interrogate the prisoners right there and then on the battlefield.
And one of the women was a seamstress  so she made beau tiful collars for us on our prisoners dress.
They were prisoners  frequently prisoners from criminal institutions  from criminal prisons where people who were come...were were there for committing some violent crimes like murder  something like this  and they were made trustees in in concentration camps and we were for the first time exposed to kapos who were also brutal and miserable and who I believe tried to outdo the German guards in order to retain their privileged position.
According to the Geneva Conference  you are supposed to that was the story I was told according to the Geneva Agreement  you're supposed to cure prisoners a prisoner before you execute him.
Did you see any trace of the real prisoners of Ebensee  the former prisoners of Ebensee?
And they took them and they was 24 hours marching through Moscow like prisoners.
And then in the end  I think there was about 15 or 18 000 prisoners there in this camp.
A transport of several hundred Jewish prisoners from various camps in Germany arrived in Birkenau at that time.
And we were being bombed by American bombers  which was something happy event for us although some prisoners got killed  and in the factory  where we did also mostly construction work.
So some of those inmates that were now held by the former prisoners were actually hung on the factory pipes right after the war.
And they sent her to Auschwitz and when the trai n arrived  they decided they didn't need any more prisoners in Auschwitz and they sent her off to Bergen-Belsen.
There was a concentration camp where the prisoners were forced to assemble V -2 rockets under horrendous conditions in abandoned salt mines.
Because he was there not for prisoners  but he was sent for the sailors  for the Norwegian and Danish sailors.
03:28:49 The prisoners  you said when you entered  what was going on?
And I thought  ﬁWhat happens now to her when she is ﬂ -- I thought [indecipherable] kill her  or what And they said  ﬁNo  there is a hospital here.ﬂ And thats all prisoners  the doctors  the nurses  [indecipherable] everybody is a prisoner except the leaders are Germans.
The smoke was still on when they took us to a transport and we arrived to the Wars aw freight station and placed eighty prisoners in one freight car.
2 The the thing is that generally prisoners had a long coats  which were... I mean  they were very poor quality; uh but the striped coat... But I had only a short one since I didn't walk.
I found an English textbook and David Copperfield and I learned English  found a tutor as well  among the prisoners.
Yes  and no matt I mean there were Prisoners of War  there were DP's  just about anyone.
The people in charge of us were Germans -- not Germans  soldie rs  but prisoners of war  criminals  people who were sent to concentration camps for crimes committed  and all of a sudden they became the elite 33 of the --snapping their fingers.
So  the relationship inside I wouldn't say -- we had some Greeks there  some Greek prisoners of war because I heard so many different languages.
When Mauthausen was cleared of the survivors  and the dead had been buried  our prisoners were transported back to Mautha usen  and they were incarcerated in those barracks until they were later exchanged probably to the Russians  because they were supposed to be turned over to the Russians anyway  and I suspect the Russians kept them for X number of years at forced labor.
They were all prisoners as we were  and they were women -- Jewish women from Czechoslovakia.
So we drank this coffee  this sweet coffee  which was not real coffee because the Germans  they wouldn't give the prisoners.
>> Bill Benson: David  in our remaining time  you're in the woods hiding with the two Russian prisoners of war.
When you went down into the crematorium  did you go with some prisoners who explained anything to you?
Inside the camp we were ruled by criminals  by German criminals who were also prisoners in the camp  but they were above us.
And there was  by then  the prisoners were broken up according to nationalities  whereas previously everything was mixed.
a protractor and a wrench  I think  and pliers maybe and... And do you think those were things that prisoners might have made or -- I really do.
But the the prisoners  the-they theyre theyre theyre [indecipherable] next to rags when th when they came in there  and they were always brought in on trains  closed boxcars and so on.
They had the capacity of 2000 or even more prisoners or people could be gassed in one sitting.
34 I'd like to interrupt a moment because you mentioned again you had the prisoners of war with you.
Were there Poles there  or Russians  or There were some Poles.
He says  dont take no prisoners from them  look what they did to them.
And at this point  I noticed two of my new men  that  uh  just came into combat for the first time  had three German SS prisoners.
And they made all the prisoners do the work for them.
Yes  we were we were had our duty was to guard these gentleman prisoners.
Our clothes were taken off and our hair was shaved and the other USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0022 24 prisoners introduced us to this wonderful life in -- in Auschwitz.
That but otherwise in - there were some numbered prisoners  with numbers and this we experienced.
In Auschwitz  if the people  the prisoners from Auschwitz they talk to us.
But the thing was that some of these roofs leaked and the red paint dripped on some of the prisoners.
So we had to go over to the barracks where these people were di if if you Were there still prisoners in Dachau?
But even they were not trained  or prepared for such mass influx of prisoners.
So these guys to ok -- took as many people [indecipherable] prisoners as possible.
But  was the same in in in in a prisoner of war camp later.
They were being fed 4 000 calories a day as prisoners  while the Jews were getting 1700 calories a day from UNRRA and the military  most of it potatoes.
Well  the lead tank  the guy jumped down  and he spoke German  he was a German-American that they used as an interpreter  and he made all the tanks stop and he brought the officers up  the commanding officer  and they radioed ba ck to the battalion that they had some guys who were escaped prisoners  and to make a long story shor t  they used us.
I said  the Polish uprising in Warsaw   when did it come?
And since it was the end of April 1945  Himmler realized that Germany has lost the war ; so insisted that he should release some prisoners from Ravensbruck.
Q. When you were liberated did the prisoners try to retaliate at all against the German guards?
Now the war is over  35 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD where'd they go?
01:52:36 And said that we would go towards the Swi ss border  that from there on we would be 12 exchanged against the German prisoners not prisoners.
That they required food for the journey that there were these warehouses of American military of war packages in our warehouses in Paris  packages that would no longer be needed  that were already being stolen.
Across the street was the magazine  there was an undersh  a German and another Ss man and there were three  four Polish guys  intellectuals from the colleges which they were also like prisoners but in a different way.
All the prisoners of war are going to kill us  because the Russians know we were helping the German economy.
There was a man  one of the prisoners  we have to give everything to him.
The gate was open  and prisoners were wa lking in and out freely.
And for all the strange things  I was selected by the adults to be the one to be representative  because every morning the door opened  and I had to report  in German  that six prisoners  all here  everything in order.
Next to our ghetto we had a building with Russian prisoners  and they were wounded.
3 Political prisoners USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0003 33 33 Are you Jewish?
They was in train this pass from Poland and Poland Czechoslovakia and most of prisoners from the Russian front from the German.
So  they had to keep a very close account of the property of the women political Polish prisoners.
And he didn't care what they are doing with these prisoners  if they gave them the full portions   you know  the full rations or not.
I had learned that there were American prisoner of war packages in several American military warehouses in Paris which were no longer need because our prisoners of war had already been sent back home.
They were used to have first people -- prisoners from jails  yeah.
But they learned from this mistake  because whenever they have prisoners now  United State prisoners  they dont give them all that food  they just gave it to them gradually  and reconditioned them gradually.
And he grabbed four or five prisoners who were wandering in the camp  and made them go into the attic; and from the attic they brought down four uh cabin[et]s  wooden cabin[et]s.
She was at home  and when I have learned that the German post o ffice is functioning vair  and parcels are arriving to non-Jewish prisoners from their home in Germ any  I made it my business to write a letter  because we were able to write from time to time cards  post cards.
The German Nazis who wanted to destroy me  they are the ones that treated me in the camp because they were prisoners of war.
Well this lives any more  but this is a copy  this you'll see is the barbed wire here  this is an organization that sprung up  about right after the liberation and it became known as the Union of Former Political Concentration Camp Prisoners and Political 41 Prisoners and this simply asked the railroad and buses and so on to give me a seat and be nice to me because I had TB.
Now here already was a different h-here already you were a in in in th in Horgau  I dont know  I think there was  for prisoners  used to be there before  prisoners  like soldiers  maybe British  who knows?
