>> Bill Benson : Before the war began in Europe in 1939  you finished college   you went to work   you got married a nd you gave birth to a child .
You -- you just -- your whole concept -- I think soldiers in war time too  they are afraid  but they just -- oh  excuse me.
do your work there  and then when the war ends -- And the war -- -- you go home.
When the war is over  are you folks guarding Germans? [
And they never really talked about the war  but -- and -- and in thir -- and in ‚58  you know  it wasnt too far behind and they had one chair in the house and I dont know how that came up  whether I said something  what a nice chair it was or not  I dont recall and he said  ﬁWe were all out ﬂ he said  ﬁthe children were in school ﬂ and he and his wife -- he was at work and his wife was off someplac e and when they came home  their house was just rubble.
They wanted a serv ice  so we had services  after which one young woman came up to me  introduced herself in quite good English  told me that she and her three sisters and three of their fr iends  all from Krakow  had been together through the war.
Well  when I met my friends af ter the war  number one  we were so full of hatred  we were looking for some kind of an outlet  some organization that we can join  and we found it.
I didnt have that luck  so the same thing after the war  people stay in Germany  the -- right away there was organized camp  they got what to eat.
Have you ever had I think I know the answer to this  but have you ever had an opportunity t-to ever since the war  talk to an ybody on the other side?
They would put certain ice-melting stuff in there  like some flame throwers or something like this  and thank heaven the war did not last two weeks longer because I probably would have been shot for sabotage because what I cut on the circular saw was a quarter of inch too long  a quarter of an inch too short.
And that -- after the war  of course  was fashionable to blame everything on the SS  but the army and the navy were involved.
I was visualizing all these peopl e that running away from Vietnam  being more or less associated with our problem that we ha d during the war  just history repeats itself all the time.
And a bunch of them are comi ng back to Europe to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the end of the war and the liberation.
>> Bill Benson: I've wondered  Jacqueline  if even though Paris was liberated in August of 1944 and you were able to sort of resume a life there   with the war continuing until the following late spring  early summer of 1945  if there was fear that the Germans could return   if there was an ongoing fear of what if the tide shifts again.
And they both survived  not 10 together  separately  as prisoners of war.
Uh he had this little business that he ran in Split during the war and uh he  when we left  he knew that everything was gone.
SE: Oh  that we heard after the war  from somebody -- from a gavy -- After the war?
And when World War I broke out  his brothers insisted he come back to Germany.
I never saw him  I tried to find him after the war  I couldn't.
>> Bill Benson: While you were doing that and having time because your mother was so busy trying to figure out how you're going to get out of Germany -- and I think it's important for the audience to keep in mind that war did not begin until September of that year  September 1939   so this is still just a little before the actual war began.
So  since my husband learned -- my husband was actually a businessman before the war  and he was like about nine years older than I am  so he was already a young man  able to work and -- and sustain himself.
And our queen said we have a department of war documentation.
I didn't feel it so much because I was still a prisoner of war  a Polish prisoner of war.
>> Albert Garih: That's where we were first really directly affected by the war.
An d we were trying to get rid of all the SS people over there  and the war was still moving on.
Tape 24 HELEN LUKSENBURG page 71 Know about survival that you didnt know before the war?
But after he married my mother in Romania -- he remained in Romania because -- he married my mother bec ause he fell in love after the war came to see us.
And the Korean War  I must tell you Im not familiar enough to give a [indecipherable].
And for some reason  I stayed with them the whole war.
I also remember collecting silver tinfoil  balls of it that somehow were being given for the war effort.
So  therefor e  i -- sabotage was a very serious attack on the German war machine  and that was  therefore  that the Germans  in 43  the 29th of August  where there have been quite a lot of sabotage before  that was railway  it means that the transportation between Germany and Norway  which normally went through the Danish headlines  they were disturbed  and then the -- the Germans demanded that there should be again  a general punishment for sabotage and for carrying weapon.
It was a nice rich before the war  it was a nice Jewish home  so they took it over when they threw the Jews inside the ghetto.
but there is something different when a war comes on when when you have a force that  you know  an occupying power that has this po licy.
I was 14  and then they -- when came  you know  before the war ended  you know?
And during the whole war  she always was very nice to us.
So one day we decided  so the chauffeur  we had a chauffeur after the war we lived good.
Only after the First World War this part where mother used to live was called Grungrund when the Austrian people took it.
When she returned to Poland two weeks before the war started  her brother begged her to stay but you know  she said ﬁlook  I have a child and my husband over there.ﬂ When she crossed Germany  the train wa s seeing  nobody could get  you know  she just transited into Germany  into Poland.
Its a recognition of many years of work and struggle for the common values  because since the beginning of the Cold War  United States goals and objectives were identical with our asp -- Polish aspirations.
And we were sitting -- if you stay first in the first war  you move down and you ended up down in the caves where we were spending our last time.
These country were built due to the treaty in Versailles after the war.
The first day  when Germany declared war to Poland  they bombed our city.
Tell me please a a few words about the first days of the war and how this impacted on the life of your family.
Yeah  photograph The Forefront War  I think there are photographs here.
And Munich was badly damaged in the war too  so there was a lot of poverty around and -- and -- and of course  I spoke German well  so I had no trouble communicating.
Why don't we start with you telling us about your family  community  what life was like both before the war and the events that led up to Kristallnacht.
He was the war plants officer USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 194 for the Far East.
You know  you could get othe r stations too  but they didn't--they spoke some French but not English  but my mother's brother was an engineer and he was  of course  able to do all of these things  but he left for Spain and unfortunately he was killed in the Franco war.
Because  uh  there was another...there was a farmer  not far away--Boogard 4--a very well-known name here  because of what he did during the war.
When you went to war  in the factories they gave you some soup.
Once I went to Brussels I was detached from that  and I don't think I feared for my life during the last three months of the war.
When the war ju st began...what was it like for you?
You were special because your father got a year long trial  and afterwards  he wasnt shot by a Russian in the war  or by a French  or an English  but he was hanged  so that was special.
Will we be able to find our way back from the concentrati on camp universe into a world in which most of us have no longer any other possessions than the memories of before the war and in which we will live among people to whom our years of imprisonment will only mean --\ Oh  there's another one of those who only complain about lost things and tell horror stories.\
So 16 we wanted to go back to Vienna  but the border was already closed down because there was already the beginning (clearing throat)...excuse me...of the cold war so the border was closed down by Russia at that point.
This was one of the high drinx after the war  what I did.
I found out later on that he also sheltered a family in an attic thro ughout the war.
Again  you learned that recently  you say  and Im interested in after the war.
And then when the war -- when he -- they were all mobilized  you know  when the threat in 39 came  and the end of 38  so -- and he ha d to be at the river  the IJssel  that goes 16 parallel with the German border.
And they had lived  they were originally from Russia but they moved to Paris and they lived in France before the wa r. And during the war  they had a cottage out in the country and that's where they lived.
Interview with Eugene Chmielowski January 31  2015 16 Im talking after the war  when did you find out her story?
29 And this was also pub lished in The Forefront War.
We weren't  we didn't know there is  we didn't know what a war means even.
So  we went to the place where we lived  at that time it was quite a few families lived in the house  because the Russians in Slonim originally  we had something like about 10 000 Jews before the war.
A2: in a group like that  and I guess the Fulda had had a large Jewish population before and during the war  that there were Very Orthodox.
I had no bad time after the war in Hunga ry but I never went home to Hatvan.
And something else I wanted to ask you about the war years  and the years leading up  did you ever s what was the ar the Arrow Cross doing in Hungary ?
But that was before sometimes he may have war fought for with the Russians or Ukrainians  I have got no idea  but I was too young to know about that.
Were people celebrating the end of the war  and you know  what what was the general feeling?
After the war started  my parents knew  and Parisians knew  and Jews knew especially  life was not going to be very good for the Jews of France  and especially the Jews of Paris.
SL: Listen  he wa -- he was in the -- in the soo -- in the war.
When the war broke out in 39  my father came home Saturday they used to he came home from the killing house  he used to kill the the Saturday night  in the evening [indecipherable] he came home a Saturday evening  and he says  we in the war.
One minute they were shepherds and the next minute they were running the city  or being the police chiefs  or demandi ng that li -- that [indecipherable] we had a house and they demanded that we relinquish the house because we didnt have -- that was not the house we lived in  but we had another building that was under construction  starting from before the war.
So he -- but he had a very broad  general educati on  so that permitted him to work as an economist  and since the war was approaching  he was able to fill in a lot of information about industrial production  coal mining and the like from -- in Germany because that had been his background  even when he was a lawyer for the coalminers union.
50 No  after the war  I didnt want to go But  I mean  when you were in Osterberg  you thought you were protecting your mother in some way?
You were a student in this country during the war -- a good part of the war.
I'm determined in having a hand in the rebuilding of Germany and in the punishing of the war criminals but in salvaging the best of Germany and in building of the foundations of a just and lasting peace.
And then after about after about 24 hours the German Russian soldier said that the war is over and handed the first cigarette I'd ever seen in my life.
And unfortunately  a fe w days before the beginning of the war  maybe everything would be different  my father brought the car into Alytaus and left the car to fix.
We went out to the different organizations and to find out if the war could be ended  but there wasnt much response in that respect  and so it went on til the end of the war.
And that was right at the end of the war  and my dad used to travel back and forth in Amsterdam.
And they were the Germ ans who were supposed to protect the town  maybe about 30 Germans with had with the machine guns  the all  you know  ready to to fight the war.
And I remember when the war -- the war ende d and they announced on the radio.
Do you recall anti-German -- I dont know whether to call it propaganda or -- ways in which the United States portrayed the German s once -- once you came here   and then after the war  was there a -- a lot of talk about how horrible the Nazis were  or other people?
I should just say for the record here that in your video testimo ny and then in the audio interview that I did with your husband the other day he told the story of how you lost your younger brother and he was tricked and the whole thing with the phony resort and that after the war  as far as you knew that he had not survived.
Tell me  how did the war how did you learn about the war happening?
But there was no recognition on the part of anybody uh what the consequences were of...of our experiences  of the war experiences.
What were your memories when the war was over in 45?
How long did you stay in Russia after the war was over  before you went back to Poland?
And until we read your book just now  the family did not know what happened to him beyond the war office telegram saying that he was killed in action.
The end of the war came while I...we were still in Egypt.
So that gives you a picture how the time between the beginning of the war in September 1939 until we were arrested.
And she continued this after the war  too and I think I rebelled a lot and became very -- in some ways  she was very intim -- controlling and intimidating and I think I had a hard time working on that and working through all that.
in immediately after the war  because they were  you know  just from the army.
We made the request to the Red Cross after the war  but we didn't find -- but now I found out that they were killed on the same day.
And thats about it  because my parents were around in the early 30s  when the war broke out.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0040 48 We have seen the war  and in the -- the years after the war  we saw the casualties  we saw the million  we saw the result  we saw the con -- the concentration camps and -- and if continued in -- in the Soviet Union  where a gulag -- where Stalin killed even more people than Hitler.
I was a 4-F  but I -- I was born with a -- a -- a heart abnormality  which disqualified me for military service  but I still felt it was an event I wanted to observe first hand and I heard about the American field service  which sent ambulance drivers  as it had done in World War One  to Italy and to the first French army  which was then not yet back actually into France.
T e discovered by the Polish underground movement during the war  that they were cooperating with Germans and they were caught and proven  they were taken on the side somewhere in the  outside of everybodys view and they were shot and killed by the special units of Polish underground movement and it was very obvious reason.
It was kind of an interesting situation  because the cold war era sort of came along -- Yes.
And we  when we came back from the  after the war  we went back to Lodz to look for family.
But in any case  one day I was allowed to go out to work under a one-on-one guard to dig an air raid trench  and I discovered where I was digging was obviously a field cemetery from the Swedish-Polish war of 200 years ago.
They came out smelling like a rose  too  after the war.
In that time that you were in Antwerp  of course  the war -- the war officially began.
Why dont you tell me a little b it about when the war broke out?
But she was a a wonderful person and even after the war she kept in touch with my family.
The Hungarian girls came in later on in the War  because Hungary was not jet included.
Th ey were in a horrible walk up an d they so needed to  it was very 93 difficult  it was after the war  apar tments were not available.
After the war  I got myself a job and another job and a third job.
So they got in with us as war prisoners; and that's funny but that's what th ey did.
I was studying especially Latin because everybody suggested that that would probably create a problem when all of a sudden I  war would be overŠwe were always optimistsŠand I could go to  instead of the first form to the second form a nd Latin would create the biggest problem.
What happened when the war broke out to your  to your family  to the business  at first?
Because we also in Romania  the moment the war started  what was left of the political parties  the national [indecipherable] laborers and myself and the whol e population of Romania  we fully agreed that we have to get back the [indecipherable].
The beginning we were talking of every kind of socialism  democratic socialism  or radical socialism  theoretical things  and what we have to do after the war and what is the best way to become democratic  or undemocratic  many theoretical things.
Well  my father died as a result of World War I  in 1919.
Only after the war wh en the concentration camp came back.
I bought right after the Interview with William Luksenburg 19 war a big junk yard.
They were interested just to fight a war against the Germans.
Interview with Samuel Marein-Efron May 8  2013 14 But anyways  he he applied to stay in the United States   and he was hoping to bring us all there  at least to sit out the the the war  because he knew that if he couldnt get back two ways  I mean there was no reason for us to to stay there.
We had to take care of the old people because the younger people  the regular people who worked there  who were supposed to work there  they had to work in the factory for the war effort.
It seems  as I survey my war experiences  that always it was that particular instance  it wasnt the general  you know?
Interview with Alan Kalish October 24  2003 78 Are you also hearing rumors about the war?
The Pesach I remember most di stinctly was in -- in 1948  and the reason I remember it is because my mother was telling me the story about the Egyptians  and then at the same time there was the Arab Israeli war.
She was 9 years ol d when the war broke out and I can only think of her as fear and love and by fear i mean the fact that she was so terrified of bein g torn away from the family.
So I got out and I came to France and stayed in France until the outbreak of the war.
And later on  I found out that that's...Auschwitz was part of where they repaired--planes that were damaged during the war were stripped  used for spare parts.
05:09:05 Okay  coming back to the war we finally were lib erated.
They made a conn ection through someone they knew who knew someone who knew someone to two people whos e names are Cory and Jan Van Nomberg who are people who I now know as my aunt and uncle who live in Tilburg who we have been very close to since the war; people who Im very  very fond of.
When the war broke out Karlsruhe was on the list of evacuation.
The war broke out; the night when the war broke out  I was on a date with a beautiful girl.
Well  its not so easy to get to America when you live in Europe right after the war and youre caught under Communism.
They didnt think its gonna take the war was God knows they they thought after the pact  you know  when the Hitler did the pact with Russia  its gonna be one  two  three and theyre gon na divide  and you can go home and be yourself like you were before.
Well  we heard the word  Achtung  Achtung  that ﬁGermany capituliaﬂ -- that the -- there -- the war was over.
And I ask her if I could send -- if she would send a letter from me to people she knew who had been in the wa r in Holland  Jewish people who had been in war in Holland  and if they would then contact me  maybe we could meet.
Because after the war  we tried to get together how many people survived.
Head  head guard person  and that's all documented  and I as I said I bought the \ The Trials\  after the war when I was in London and read it studiously in horror - to read my own my own history so to speak  because I lived in a in a little vacuum  not really knowing that in another camp other things were happening.
I think that the morale  up until this Cold War business  I think that Taylor could inspir e great dedication  hard work and he could rally people to the cause  without any question.
They got their papers but they couldnt leav e because it begin the war and it stopped everything.
You know  very few Jews went back to live in Germany after the war  and to have such a prominent place in the life of a university and the city is -- I remember that he also when he went back he wrote a -- what you call those columns where you answer people's problems in the newspaper?
Its a book about the war and the ghetto  and what the Jews were doing from day to day from the beginning of the occupation.
And USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0048 93 when Austria declared war on os -- on Serbia  the Russians declared war on Austria  and the French declared war on the Russians  and -- and Austria  and the English way north  and the first World War started.
There was a feeling of war  but nobody was thinking of Pearl Harbor  of course  as you will hear later.
You have the war time but the earlier time which was a good time  right?
My image of a war was soldiers against soldiers not soldiers against children.
22 What about the difference in attitude toward going into war?
Didnt -- youre ta -- youre now talking about after the war  you didnt want to go back to Europe  right.
No  I would not say that upbringing did it  it is the experience during the war which made me.
But it was so that during the war for young people  no chance  life was so boring we couldn't go -- there was cinema but for German people only.
And when the war broke out  obviously things got totally changed because the resettlement of Jews came into being and all this  but this is a story that well probably continue later.
Did she talk much about her lif e with your father  after the war?
The war is going to pretty soon end  and I want you should survive  somebody should survive.
And I my ma end of the war was when the war was ending  I was in the high patra in Markiati because they send me to to to be healthy again  so What happened to you after the war?
The -- the extreme right party got stronger  and you asked me what was the first impact of war?
They look back and they come to me and they want to know a little bit about World War II  I can tell them certain things about World War II  but it wont have any meaning for them.
I had a brother and two sisters still there after immediately aft er the war.
And then he got sent -- he was going to get sent overseas and he got shipped out to Seattle and then the war ended.
And now  all of a sudden   towards the end of the war  after your mother and sister were deported  you were -- you were like th e head of the family  and the kids -- I was left alone  I had to battle for myself.
I dont know where her husband was -- or died or in the war  I dont know what happened.
Where which to the best of my knowledge was con  was continued  the continuation of the ORT schools which had existed in Russia and Lithuania before the war which were basically vocational high  vocational schools.
After the war -- when the war was over and you could begin to make contact  di -- di -- did you go back to Berlin?
During the war he occasionally came and brought food because food was very  ve ry rare in Vienna.
After the war  quite a bit  and there wa s only two Jewish girls in that whole school  another one and myself.
And before the war  his mother...he didn't have a father...his mother used to be the one...she wished to work in the public baths.
And even when I was in high school  my Interview with Louise Birch 23 July 15  1995 chemistry teacher in high school was a doctor  a female doctor and she was a doctor in World War One.
Dont mix crimes against humanity with war crimes or crimes against the peace.
After all  it was after Worl d War I. The economy wasn't a very good one.
Yeah  and war was kind of a relief for me when it broke out.
When they knew that it was going towards the end of the war and they were going to send them back to help round up the Germans and so my the minute the war was over  my father left with the whole battalion of soldiers.
What do you think the effect of the war has been on you?
If that is the case  then she died after the war  though.
>> Bill Benson: Fred  as you said earlier  you left Germany six weeks after the war began.
The original was destroyed in the war in the World War II and I thought  good for them.
The war crimes are being studied on a great -- a greatly improved scale  by a number of universities.
He said that Jews from Gleize from World War I were smothering tobacco from Austria into Poland  Warsaw.
After the war  I found out that my father and my older brothe r run away to Cs (c.79) which is another town about eight mi les from us.
And now comes the war  theres no travel  right  nobody can move  and now they have nothing to do and these children are being brought in  you know  by the government.
Well  we took the position  say to the Germans  youve lost the war.
indecipherable] We ended up  after the war  or when the war was over  we were in northern Italy.
And I was hoping that these bullets would misfire and I was hoping that in this way it would be my part of the war effort against the Nazis.
So I saw the butcher shop when the war was over  and I went in.
So before the war  they co....they cooperated with the Jews in commerce and in business  like my late father needed for example a loan.
All the labor battalions I mention ed to you that were hungry  they didn't leave behind -- mind you  the war is over.
So so there the what otherwise here when especially  when I was already in this in displaced  after the war  in Germany   in displaced person camps and again  you have to read my book  ﬁ I Had Nowhere to Go  ﬂ some of the young people  between 20 and 27  they were so horrible  they were they could kill anybody an I mean  they could steal  rob  kill.
Before the war [indecipherable] decided  because -- that he wants to go to United States.
Here we were  after the war  my mother and I had just gone through five years of war.
n this years obviously before World War Two in a small Polish town which was about half and half  Polish   one of the most important things to know about this one can imagine.
He came to... he had come to th is country before I  right after World War II.
I'm still not clea r to this day -- and  of course  I will never know -- whether my parents had me because they had a sense that the war was coming or the fact that my brother at that time was 9 months old and it was an opportunity to send me.
>> Bill Benson: Before the war began  I think you told me your father eventually joined your mother in the business.
Germany went to war attacking Poland in 26 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD September 1939.
They called it TWX and he would ask me  in this part icular instance  he aske d me to send him the names of likely personnel for his operation  wh ich I did in conjunction with help from the Civil Affairs Division of th e War Department.
They promised my story to hide pages so I could recover after the war  which I did recover about 30 percent of it.
You see  I actually si gned up during the Spanish Civil War  I would be a volunteer and I was going to Spain  but the war ended before -- before I got an assignment.
Did -- did you experience anti-Semitism as a kid before the war?
You Interview with Erika Eckstut January 16  2002 64were here when the United States became involved in the war in Vietnam .
Were you in touch with the family that had -- y-your foster family in Belgium at all after the war? [
They went back to my unit and continued on my job  and we fought or way onto Magdeburg and we attacked   captured Magdeburg on the 18th of April  and as far as we were concerned  that was th e end of the war.
He was at the war and he became a -- he was in Russia yet before the war.
But everybody in town knew that something terrible was going to happen  because a few months before  there were a lot of people from Silesia running to the Russian borders  and wa and that was even before the war  before 1941  and there were some peopl e that stayed with us in our house  because any you have to offer hospitality to any strangers that c-come through the town.
So  you're trying to control who's in the camp  but what you're saying said  people are coming in  maybe eight months after the war has ended  and the U.S. Army doesn't want them to  or UNRRA doesn't want them to 04:23:44 No  no.
The country was in war  the need for labor was obvious.
Now you're with the partisan group and the Germans are now retreating and somehow's there a sense that the end of the war is coming.
We all lived in Manhattan  and then my son went into the Army during the Vietnam War.
First time it was at the hotel  the Hampshire House  by a rabbi  actually a Hungarian rabbi  who had come here after the war  and had his congregation in New Haven.
So I 12tried to talk to -- I met in libraries in the Silver Spring area was Jewish War Veterans.
And I was impressed that she took a strong position agai nst the United States at that time  when she lived here entering the war.
I don't know how he felt at the end of the war  I don't know how he felt before he died but my feeling wa s that he was close.
So you stayed home with your family  and then the war was over?
That school received  got a new principal in the year 1934  he was a retired Army colonel who had fought in the First World War and also was a through and thr ough convinced Nazi ideologue.
I was telling USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0056 41him more or less about my experiences  which -- you know  an American kid  I mean  they -- it-its hard to him to -- to -- to -- to ac -- to ac -- understand this whole war situation in Europe.
So I will well come to this point  but right now Im still trying to get a sense  before the war  of what kind of community you were ab in  what were your relations to your parents  what what are your memories of the place.
You know  the parents were -- its -- its -- it was an absolute another life before the war  I mean.
I was when the war started  I was 12 years old.
He brought us into -- I looked fo r him at the end of the war.
Yeah  they talked a lot about they were to this day  they were very much imbued with everything that happened during the war before the war  talk about the family  talk about what happened to them during the war  after the war.
Plus hes going all over the country  talking about the Finnish war.
TECHNICAL CONVERSATION I would like to ask you to describe me very briefly  how was your life and of your family with your parents  the life of the gypsy community before the war?
This was November  1939  early November  and I opened the door  and I saw one German uh  whatever he wa s  some kind of a officer  and three uh  uh men uh dressed in black uniforms of the local Germans who were of course the traitors to Poland  and they collaborated and uh before the war  and with the Ger-and collaborated during the war with the uh with the occupiers  and they came  and the  the ma n said that we are  where is my mother  in the meantime my mother ran up the steps and uh came to th e apt  and they said that she is arrested on  on political grounds  and she  they said to take just a few warm things  and uh  uh put all the valuables  money  jewelry on the table  and we didn' t know  I was not on the list  so my mother told me \ Why why don't you go to your boyfriend.\
>> Bill Benson: So because you didn't have a radio and you didn't know and it was war and Jacques had gone to a country that was an Ally and an enemy of Germany  you had no knowledge.
Although I tell you one thing from reading after the war  we had a courier from Poland who is still alive  still lectures.
Now we come to the -- the September  or armistice  that we got so excite d  and finally the war is over.
We just found after the war we had nothing to talk about it.
This was before his first marriage  even  as an enemy alien  fron -- from England and he came back after the war.
Spent a few days over there  till they discussed with -- how to get us to these relatives  the Bergers  who themselves spent the war years separated from their ch ildren  daughter and son.
War will be over very soon  and he will bring me and they will be rewarded if they take me.
Could you tell us now  maybe not in the detail  just kind in a general way the things that have happened to you  what your life has been like  and outline since you since the end of the war?
So  your first meal after the war starts  wh en you go back home  is a for mal meal with whatever you had  and then you end your experience in even more–?
The bridge is this; when the Vietnam situation started  I  after my six years of war and being Interview with Peter Masters September 25  1998 88an officer in the British army  in an elite unit  thought that that was the reasonable thing to do.
I'm not talking about right after the beginning of the war and people were seized on the street and put to work on rubble.
Work I had to do to survive the war in the ghetto  in Auschwitz.
And then he wrote in his last letter to my brother Norman   this is [indecipherable] we have to die  in this war.
There was no transportation at that point; there were only  you know  Germans going out  you know  like a war in the city  impossible to walk.
Was there fighting going on in Rotterdam itself  as the Germans were losing the war?
>> Patricia Heberer -Rice: I think  from going with you these past several years  that in the very early weeks of the war  when they were in Lithuania  the Germans were shooting just men and boys.
First I have to live through the war and then we'll see.
>> Bill Benson: After war broke out  your family left Paris for a second time but returned after a short period.
So they could use any labor force that they could get to support the war effort.
I -- My -- All my fingers were frozen during the war  and I still -- talk about gloves  not white gloves during the summer  but I -- Id rather wear gloves than anything else in the winter  because my hands and feet tend to get very cold  and that always is from that original freezing thing  and I dont like to be cold.
We are now in a situation we know the war can't keep very long any more.
Well  as the war was getting closer a nd closer and closer  and that must have been April  now I'm back to April.
But the pogroms were sanctioned in you know as we know in  in Germany and in Russia and we know what happened you know to the Jews you know during the last war.
And immediately after the war  what happened in Greece is this  Greece is the only country in Euro pe where those who fought the Germans lost their jobs  they -- after the war  they lost thei r jobs  they were imprisoned  they were exiled  or they were executed.
It was the German prisoners  the sick  wounded prisoners that was from the war.
Other were very assimilated  like people before the World War -- World War   it was Russia  as you know.
And he eventually went into that  because after the war  thats what he did.
So  you know  when he would tell me these stor ies I  myself  couldnt believe what this guy had to go through just  even  after the war  how the Russians kept him locked up.
Uh there the Red Cross sent a memorandu m to their delegation in Germany in which uh they left it to the decision of the delegation if they should uh submit to the German authorities uh a request for the extension of the basic rules of Red cross protection to the intern...interned people in the various camps and not in the camps of prisoners of war and the other camps.
No  not that I know  not that I Did you ever see combat before the end of the war.
And then that time I did go into Germany  because I wanted to see the displaced camp wh ere we lived for so many years  after the war.
And was wounded in World War I  he had a very Interview with Hedi Pope November 6  1997 12badly crippled hand from from a wound in World War I. And later on  after the war was over  he joined a party called the Ligity-misten.
Did that change any of your feelings about the war and the war time?
I went through a Civil War interest period  and about the time of the appearance of William Shirers book  ﬁThe Ri se and Fall of the Third Reich ﬂ I began to become interested in the military history of World War   and that matured into an interest in the political history of the second World War  a nd the Nazi regime by my high school years.
So I had difficulty in fini shing this  but I just finished in time in December 1939  when the war broke out between Finland and the Soviet s at that time.
And he explained to me that at the end of World War II  when Austria became what is now Little Austria -- ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 8 >> Bill Benson: At the end of the First World War >> Charles Stein: Before that  Austria  of course  as you probably know  the Austrian emperor ruled over what then became Austria  Czechoslovakia  most of Poland  most of Romania  Yugoslavia and the northern part of Italy.
I have done some work  some articles on war crimes tribunals and so forth.
Interview with Martin Gaudian 51 I remember I thought that  saying here I am in Germany  the war is over now and I wonder what's going to happen now  what my life will be  you know.
Cameroon was German be fore World War I. And we suspect ed that he worked with them.
Anyway  that was the tragic story of one of our people  and uh when you go on the war front and you uh you shoot it out with the melise or the Germans  that's a quick thi ng.
Because even he was not active during the war  he was 60 years old  and the Germans made the list  because he was 60 years old  that means that he was unproductive.
And yet facing the war -- you still face that  but possibly your own de -- I mean  it must have been a terrible conflict.
What do y -- what do you remember about those first days in the war?
He started in the first World War was [indecipherable]  the first  before Poland became independent in 1914  til he was taken prisoner by Soviets in 1939.
The war broke out on a Friday  Friday and I dont know the time was exactly.
Mmm and uh this is how he could uh  uh save us proving that his factory was indispensible for the war effort.
First one was -- it began to sink in that Germany lost the war  the Nazis were gone  and we were free.
SL: Well  she came back  her husband got killed and she came -- she was in -- they were in Russia during the war -- RL: And she came back with her child.
And after after the war  they thought communism is of course the solution for everybody.
And so it wasnt until after war that my father found out that my grandparents had died.
They kind of want ed to hear about the Edelweisspiraten  my contact with French prisoners of war and my membership in the Hitler Youth and why I had done that  and one of them seemed to be a little -- what's the word I'm looking for?
Along the way  we separated  he went to another unit  and and I saw him in New York after the war  and Herb he was with a big Interview with Robert Max July 14  2015 66 advertising company.
So the principal made before that  all that stuff happened  he made conversation with me  and he was in the second World War in Belgium as a soldier  a French soldier.
All that time we were fantasying that he survived the war  that he was somewhere safely and thinking about us.
Interview with Renate Fischer Chernoff June 23  2005 71 Well  thats a very interesting question  because yes  they tried to have and they have letters to their mothers until the war broke out  which was only a year.
And [indecipherable]  these are these spur of the moment situations where people in the war get together  fall in love  dont know what the future will be and then you USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0016 12 transplant somebody from Paris to Eagle Pa ss  youre -- youre crossing a -- youre going in to -- all together different culture there.
He says  Dr. Lallier  because I put in my full credential to make it [indecipherable]  he said  Dr. Lallier  I am reporting received of your letter  your inquiry  and all that I can say is that in my view -- Im translating now from the German -- in my view  any Waffen SS man or Waffen SS officer who commits a war crime ceases being me mber of the Waffen SS.
They put me in that hospital and that was -- the war ends on that day and there were a lot of shooting going on.
That was the main thing because once it started burning  the whole train went and it also interrupt...interrupted the...everything for the war effort.
I remember walking to...uh...and riding in a...on...on a cart for awhile and it was very difficult to come back to Chelm  but we finally made it and...uh...that's what I remember from before the war.
It was in 1941 -42  the heat of the war already  in France  and next step was Pithiviers  trains  cattle cars and murder into Auschwitz.
And told by some of my people that I knew from before the war  ﬁMiles  you better get out of here  because if you wont get out  theyll finish you off.ﬂ And I did.
But still  the nuns  because of the war and the draft  they usua lly had a chaplain.
She said that he was on the boat that  after us  and the boat turned around  she remembered because war broke out that very day  with the Dutch  and they told the ship to turn around.
who was just a farmer  but he had a lot of experience because he served in this Russian Imperial army during the Ru ssian Japanese war  so he was in Manchuria in China as a soldier  yeah.
My youngest daughter couldnt  when I said something to her about the Vietnam War  she says  ﬁBut Dad I was only six then.ﬂ You know  so its all ancien t history.
One name you were born with  a name -- certain -- several names that you used during the war  and a name now.
Oh yeah  and I forgot to mention also  we had -- when we left that villag e overnight  we had taken along also  all our real identifications  so that -- because obviously we knew the war would end within days or weeks  that we could then establish our true identities.
Here y ou had survived all of this  you were liberated  you went back to your town  and you were still fighting a war.
Everybody was afraid of the east  because the Polish people suffered before the war  with pogroms.
I take it this must have been during the war years?
At the same time  my brother was recruited into the Army and he did...he became...uh...American soldier and...uh...after basic training  he was sent overseas and he died in France on the last year of the war in the French...in the American army.
Its over  the war is over  I want to do something.
But we realized we were at war and this is it  so the first thing we did  Manny and I  was to tear up all our papers  flush it down the toilet.
Because of the war we could not go into France or Germany  so we were stuck.
Im going to change the subject back to the time that youre in France after the war.
So  there was a Russian guy also  a prisoner of war  and that guy  he understood that kind of work.
Just a moment now  the the war ended in 45 Correct.
A-And when the war had ended  but I was still in Hawaii  and troops were being repatriated back to the country  I asked the commanding officer if he will authorize me to go to the university there  so he said okay.
While you were in England  were you aware of any attempts to smuggle Jews into Palestine  during the war years especially  or immediately after the war?
He eventually emmigrated to Australia and he married a girl in Germany still who also survived the war and whose name  first name was Mirka... Vovek's brother?
All the prisoners of war are going to kill us  because the Russians know we were helping the German economy.
Only one brother  who the Russian mobilized to their war  and then the -- oh  I -- I apologize -- and then they -- and the -- and then they were er -- I was trying to say something about it.
It was in this town 3 000 Jews...about 300 families  but everybody had 8 children  10 children  so it was like 3 000  I think  Jews when the war started.
It was -- we were producing all different things for the German war effort  you know  an-and there were different groups.
And the war broke out when I was not even eighteen years old.
That's when he asked for special powers  which he got from Hindenburg  an old -- a hero from the First World War  the German Army  President of Germany at that time.
I re membered before the war  we were happy  we went  we came  and then all of a sudden  everythi ng changed  and that is where I had great difficulty  with that why.
And during the war  because they probably didnt have adults  so a 15 year old  about  a girl was checking the tracks  and she saw me.
And you feel like after the war  how do you react to things  you know.
From April 15th to the end of the war we saw this in many places and  uh  uh  the  uh . . . .
>> Gideon Frieder: In 1944  it was clear to anybody that Germany would lose the war.
No  it had to be before 19 thats what I am confused  because how I think even happened after 19 and I don t see how they got out  because when Hitler started it September 1 st  1939  when the war started  they you know  they moved across Europe very  very rapidly and took over Belgium  and you know  and France and every other democracy.
And they figured  \ We're gonna stay here until the war is over  so at least we'll have food;\  because they didn't know how it's gonna turn out.
But a rumor was that the Russi an front was nearing from the east and of course later on  we found out in Auschwitz that all these labor camps that were situated in this heart of Poland  that did war production for the Germans were liquidated about the time we were.
And due to the fact there was a lot of prisoner of war who were Germans  they kept on running the same hospital  the same thing i-it was  except in as how shall I say?
Now  come to find out  after the war when I went back with Lisa  that it -- they produced marble in that area.
And they got out and lived in France throughout the war  running from place to place in hiding  as people did who survived in France.
Yeah  and there are other incidents like th is after the war  immediately where people in Berlin did not think that she was Jewish because the way she looked when she came to look for me  but maybe when we go into this  we can discuss it later.
Is this right after the war  or still during the war?
He had I believe still a prisoner of war  but we left some gifts with his wife  who was deliriously happy to see us.
We lived in a town where mostly Jews so they didnt suffer enough.. Tell me about the war when it broke out.
There is also in the Bible there is such a name of -- Chronicles it's called or something  so I -- the first I did note all the events was happened with us  with our family  or with the people of the small ghetto from the beginning of the war till now  and I put also daydreams.
A (Pela): The war broke out...broke out uh September the 1st.
On September 3  on ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 11 Sunday  the British and the French declared war on Germany.
I hate to stop you but could you tell me what happened to your family during the war?
Again  that was Interview with Fred Lorber December 2  2011 4under the governing ship of Austria at that time  before the first World War  and when the war broke out  my grandfathe r apparently had a general store in Belz  and they buried all their merchandise  because they felt that the war would be taking place where they lived  and they went on to the west  and they ended up with relatives in Budapest for a very short time; then emigrated to Vienna at the beginning of World War I. How old were your parent s around one World War I?
He was very eager to get away from it and he served in the First World War and had a chance to see the world  a little more of the world.
You know  eight year old boy  I mean  what did I know about war?
The man was eh ah someone who was my father's employee before the war Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
So we had critical shortages  we had shortages in tungsten and in carbides and in nitrates and ironically  completely aside from the synthetic rubber deal  a lot of this cr itical war material was being shipped to South America for eventual transmittal to Germany.
So  was your father a prisoner of war at that point?
I had gone to the trade school  and during the war  when the Germans decided Jewish kids couldnt go any longer in school  I was out of trade school.
Uh  what we thought at that time is this is a war between Poland and Germany  and that's about the end of it.
I tried to keep it for some years after the war  but it slowly leaked away  especially after I found out that God had let 6 million others perish.
And if there is a potential for that in the future  conceivably the perpetrators of the future might stop to think twice before perpetrating crimes along th e lines of these crimes that 102 were perpetrated during the second World War.
Means papers that they won't  don't work for the war  German war industry.
After the war  at that time I we were friends  and I married and after we went  her parents went to Germany.
But I was cle ar what the war was about and I was glad to be doing it.
Now if these are rumors and we prove to be wrong at the end of the war  then so 24 be it.
But inside of me I always  yes  I ha ve to live through that war.
Maury Sprung was a major in the United States Air Force during the war.
I see  and so had he gone on to higher education when he wa during before the first World War?
Did your family think -- Oh everybody -- everybody are afraid to war  if somebody know what mean the war.
So  you were in the Mediterranean  and thats when I asked about the end of the war.
Joe DuBo is can be canonized for his devotion to the Jews  for the fight th at he made in the face of people like Rabbi Wise  60 who wouldn't approach the President during th e war to tell him what was goi ng on.
Well I told them I alread y was in a war.
And so the there probably were still some refugees of the Spanish civil war in Gurs when the Germans arrived.
And some people asked after the war  said  could you make it for me?
Yo-You mentioned in your videotape  yo u -- you told of two dreams that you had during the -- during the war.
And after a year  after the war was over  he came and he found the little slippers.
After the war  when I came to America I met his wife.
Everything turned  our friendship  our love  didnt su rvive the war.
And after the war  I think I know that I I lit a fire in there.
Enough so that half a year later  they started the war so everything was from us.
6 1940  May 10  4:00 in the morning  my father came and shook me and said  boy  let's go to the basement  it's war.
Is there any ex pectation that theres going to be a war?
So when the war was was over  where was the decision to go back?
After the war uh when they collected the children in uh in Auschwitz.
My father  yeah  my father went to wor k. I think he probably closed for a day or two but he still had one or two non-Jewish employees who stayed really with him until the end and in fact  I had been corre sponding with one of them soon after the war and I sent him some food packages wh en I was in Munich after the war but – I lost track of him and of course he ha s to have been dead for many years now.
And while that case was pending against us  trying to get us to leave the country  the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor and started World War II.
And I think all of us fe lt that  at least the World War II people pretty much.
My uncle who had been in Drancy and my mother made him escape a nd then he was arrested  he was not the type of person who stayed out of trouble during the war.
>> Bill Benson: Did you spend time with each other talking about what you went through ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 27 during the war?
And we knew that they -- all they had -- all -- came all the way to Ireland  I mean Holland  and -- I mean  we -- we heard some stuff  but we didnt know really the -- the -- the -- the -- the scale of the -- of the war  and the destruction of the Jews.
After the war  and -- even though what -- what strikes me as outstanding is the fact that even though we had gone through all this trauma  my parent s were not selfish to the point of trying to hold onto us  to stay with them  where th ey were making a living  where they were rebuilding themselves  but had sent me on to the bigger city where there was my s -- me and my sister  to Stuttgart  where they were -- from Amberg to Stuttgart  where there was a Jewish school.
December was over  but in May that was the end of th e war.
You would have been in a very comfortable family  had there been no war  had there been no Holocaust Yes 50 had there been Sure  sure  sure  sure  sure.
Before that   he was an Albania during the war Italy  Albania and so on  and we met at Voice of America.
And then Rozia after the war a nd before the war she was very capable.
So first of all  we we said we need to train youngsters to for as artisans that is so much needed for the German war effort  so this they understood  so it was that the school it was a course for preparing of artisans  but it wasn't...for all things and purposes it was...it was a school.
she was born in 1947  which is -- I see -- -- after the war. --
You see  I still ask myself how come I knew  afte r witnessing all that killing  after losing most of my friends in the war  after witnessing some of the atrocities  including some -- a couple of Germans had their genital parts cut off by partisan female.
And of course th at was the time where  from what I have heard from the Russians  an the Ukrainians  how horrible Russian and the Soviet system is  I said  even worse than the Germans  than the Nazis even at war I mean  they are just as the Nazis if not worse.
Probably  among this Nazi girls  there was already awareness that the war is being lo st.
Well he is  but he has to keep rolling  so he throws us two cartons of cigarettes  of the cigarettes the war was over  yo u know?
Before we turn to that time  tell us about your ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 5 family  your community  what life was like in those years leading up to not just the war  but war in Yugoslavia.
And we went and that's how we got away from being prisoner of war and spending the rest of the war.
And the Germans came when they took too long  during the war  they took too long  the Germans.
She said  ﬁI will give you affidavits worth a million dollars each  and you send them to my brother and we will find jobs for them.ﬂ And there was one man who had hidden his wife through the war  and he did beautiful work  enamel on silver  and he brought in several I shall never forget this several small dishes in a way to show me of work he did.
Holland I think uh before the war had about 110 000 Jews.
And another uncle  Nathan  and his sister  Fanny  went to the United States before the war.
And all of them went through the army school of languages  and they want anand you know all these people were going if necessary were going to be used as interrogators of the prisoners of war.
During the war  you practically knew nothing because if you went to the places who were supposed to know  you heard only you shou--you should do what you are told.
We didn't know what's going to happen tomorrow  if we survive or not while going t hrough the war.
They changed  because Hungary was starting to get slowly out of the war.
But when I saw them -- I was not in any of those concentration camps immediately after the war.
And he is the one who is going with us to Poland na -- which became Poland after World War II when I -- I say -- I became Polish retroactively when the borders changed.
Did you ever talk within your family about what had happened during the war or was this kind of a moot subject?
So in other words it -- it remained against the law fo r a Latvian who had been a member of the Waffen SS to say that he was a bookkeeper during the war  when in fact hed been a member of the Waffen SS  even if it had -- it w -- would later have been found that he had done nothing more than been a combat soldier.
S -- beginning  yeah  45 was the end of the war -- Uh-huh  46.
So youre in Euro pe -- youre in Germany when the war ends  is that correct?
And the children of Jewish front war -- war veterans  had the privilege -- some privilege -- of -- of remaining in school til Crystal Night.
No  I thats that was the first occasion and I wouldnt have even gotten out because while I was the after the war I wo rked for a friend  rather a boyfriend of my aunt was working for the Polish consulate in Frankfurt am Main when I was working to school  and somehow I met him on the concert  and we were were coming down from some concert and there was this queen of Holland or Belgium   I didnt dont remember which one  and she s the was the woman with this fat legs and we were laughing at  sayi ng thats she got a piano legs.
And even....as a  as a student I was interested in theater  and just before the war...ya  just before the war  many artists from the cabaret  from the state  from the film  fled to Holland and as I said  some  some went afterwards to the States  but some of them stayed here and I  I've seen all the big names of the...of the actors and the Cabaretiers from Berlin  in Amsterdam  which is...which I would never have seen in my life and it was unbelievable because they were really top people  and I remember that they had the theater where every fortnight they brought a new program.
3 -- in the first World War  which was such a tragedy.
I -- th -- a -- the -- basically  i-it -- it was a -- ma -- my mother used to take always something for -- for my brother to -- to -- to -- to eat li ke milk  or something  and whatever we were wearing  but wherever I went for pla -- to place  I had one things th at I wanted to wear  it was my sweater that my grandmother knitt ed for me before the war.
and there have been a lot of references back to what happened in World War Two  by commentators  and politicians  or whatever.
During the Vietnam War did you feel disillusioned with this country and its government?
After the second World War  they fought against the Germans  the other side.
Do you recall what happened... Of course  you were very young then... when the war broke out.
But what had happened  the Russians  actually Stalin  even during the war  and it was the fault of the American government of Roosevelt  actually  and Truman  that they would trust they trusted to Stalin  and even in 1945 they made the agreement in Tehran   Stalin with Churchill and Roosevelt  that how far the American army  when they will liberate Europe and Germany and other  how far they can go.
And these words were in my mind through all of the war.
And we were talking also someone  so  you know  Im still wondering  you know  I still think its a plus  and I feel til tod til today  52 years af-after the war  55 years or somewhat  and I still remember so little things I saw.
We still have some hopes that maybe -- we used to hear news penetrated into ghetto  thats -- something about the Americans decl aring war on Germany  something I heard in the ghetto  I dont whether they got -- it was in ninetin not yet.
This must have been already  since Meir is younger than my father  this must have been after World War 1.
Yes  I was very I I id yeah  I I was crazy to have joined the navy  to see the world  or whatever  for the war  because I was carsick  seasick  train-sick and every other nauseous you can imagine.
But  do you think that he came to visit you close to the end of the war?
Well  I started working in Siedlce first at the construc tion to clean  because Siedlce was also bombed during the war and there were many masonry build ings that required removal.
He had diabetes and I used to -- he was very well  working and everything  and when I was in high school  it was before the war  I used to make him insulin injections  for my father  in the arm  all the time  everyday.
Well  in 39 when the war broke out  the Jewish schools were closed  and I had to stay at home.
So  the guy looked at him and he figured like this - its almost the end of the war  what they did now  the Germans would go away because they were sometimes even they were more against Russians than the Germans.
When we had to  during the war  under the Russian occupation  we had to go to Warsaw   to German Germany [indecipherable] .
Irving: My father  in order to make a living  he we nt back to tanning during the war  which was illegal for us  but he– Anthony: Why was it illegal?
I do not remember when -- how long the trial took place -- for how long  but my mother was freed  simply because she claimed that she wanted to -- to repay the boys their goodness that they helped us to -- tried to help us during the war.
My father was called to the armies  when the war broke out.
The war only lasted seventeen days between Poland and Germany because Poland wasn't prepared for the war at all and at the same time Germany and the Soviet Union decided to divide Poland in two halves.
My mother  the day before the war ended  before my mother was and they were liquidating the camp and my cousin's wife was sick and my mother wouldn't let her alone.
I  in 1935  seeing somehow the signs that the war and and we also in our groups who had believed in our future in Germany came to the conclusion that we had to change our our our approach  that whatever we can do we should do to help people to uh to to get out of Germany  and also for those who live  as I say for one reason or the other  didn't or didn't want to go to Palestine  to other countries.
We were attached to the 20th Corps of the 3rd Army--which was [Gen. George S.] Patton's Army  and at that time it was very close to the breakthrough by the 3rd Army forces and we we usually during the war attached to an armored division and they were the ones that moved the fastest.
I have heard that the war started with Germany and  of course  all the soldiers were going toward the German borders to defend Poland.
Did you -- do you think -- Well  protect -- I -- I knew -- s ee  after the war  there were things that -- I had a long time a lot of trouble  because more than half of our friends were killed.
Hes changed his name during wor -- World War Two  when he was serving in a mixed Arab Jewish unit in the British army.
It was very much the center of the war and food was hard to come by.
I knew all about that then  but it was kind of apart from other things  this was we had won the war  we had the trial  we wo uld hope it would never 10 happen again and look what 's happened.
He is still up to his eyeballs in the -- in th at international criminal court and the acceptance of aggression as a war crime and up and up and up.
And we could see at night the city of Milan  red -- th-the sky was red  and hear all these airplane  and you know  you understand that in order to end this war  they had to bomb  because once again  although Mussolini was gone  Badoglio took over the government  Badoglio with the king  and he said  la guerra continma  and it was not an -- so people had to get out of the cities or industrial centers  even nearby  like sise to San Giovanni or other  and find places in the country  it was horrible.
So I didn't have a feeling of war  really  until 1944.
Drink a little more wa-water  you brother is here  and drink a little more here ﬂ -- because I got married in the war time  in 1940  ﬁdri -- you husband is here.
Please be uh think good thoughts because you will survive the war  but as you survive the war  try to be human beings.\
Not in the t-towards the end of the war  they filled in the blanks in in the the blank spaces in those organizations with just about anybody  in cluding  I think  Im not sure whether I told that told you that story earlier about the boy  about a 17 year old kid who told me that he was an American.
And a-after the war only who survive it was my mother and her sister.
But we knew or we thought that this was a preparation for war.
She left for Israel just shortly before the breaking out of the war and she lives in Tel Aviv  and I visit her occasionally.
I was still in France and originally I had papers to come to the United States in 1941  but that was negated by the fact that there was Pearl Harbor and the Americans [indecipherable] entered the war.
Unfortunately  when they married  it was in 1914  the war came.
And they put it into the paper and my cousin was looking through the paper  because of -- right after the war  in 1945  bif -- people that looking for family and she noticed my name there.
after the war  he was with Masaryk in Paris  and he has good contacts  and take him Poland was has a problem with Ukrainians  you know  in the east.
And we were supposed to move to Warsaw  but the war interrupted it.
Our childrens will be saved  we after the war we will have our husbands  we will have th-the childrens.
was was not married  and he was killed during the war  with no family left.
I just wa nt to tell you that afte r the war when I came ba ck to Ulanow  I came back when the Russians still were--.
That marriage did not occur until practically before the war because whether for reasons of different religions or other reasons  they had been friends for a very long time.
In 1939  just before the war  I was listening to the radio like most of the people and we heard that there might be a war against Germany.
In well  the th-the really big restrictions came after I left Germany  you know  I a-at the close to the war you know  at when wh en the war started  we you know  my my parents  they liked the outdoors.
Tell us about your family and your childhood before the war.
Yeah but you know youre never happy with anything when you go through this war.
They had worked on the refugees committee before the war  and they helped after the war.
Did you become more religious because of your experiences in the war?
It -- it was not an anti-Semitism that was active every day of th e year  but in the last few years before the war  it intensified substantially.
There were workshop s that they contributed to the war fought by the Slovaks.
You c ould understand  I think  as children we understood during the war that it was inevitable or that it was necessary  but after the war it was--.
She survived the war and found out that I was alive and that's what they did  she wrote me a letter  woul d I like to visit her in Stettin?
My father and mother had a  had different meeting places that they had agreed upon if they survived the war.
Do you think  as youve gotten older  do you think more about your experiences during the war?
After the war  life   we were all ec static obviously but there were huge shortages of everything and food was the most important .
At the end of the war  one of the people we were hiding took a tandem bike with him and took him back to Nijmegen.
I mean with all these horrors around me I  I always thought that we were dreaming of  of things --when I got home I'm going to do this and I'm going to do that and I just want to see this  this war end and just live for the day when we see the Germans defeated.
There were the departme nt of working  and lot of people who after the war immigrated  gave different recollection  different thing.
While you were over there  what inform ation did you have about the war and the concentration camps and all of that ?
And one family  they convinced us -- they were my husband's neighbors before the war.
Interview with Eva Brettler November 9  2008 45 Because it was before the war.
Little by little they start to come from the counties after the wa r. After the war for a long time  Vilnius was Lithuanian but the main language was Russian.
So there was kind of a balan ce based on communal interest  the Danish wanted to run the country safely out of the war the Germ ans wanted to have as much peace as possible to concentrate their efforts in another front.
You mentioned earlier that right after th e war  youd sent some information to the West German government about Frenzel  an d about his hometown  and where it was -- Yeah  i-it wasnt the government  it was some kind of a court.
Stayed in the camp until after the war was over  because we were liberated one month before the war was over  and then shortly after that I went to Berlin because I had hope that my father had survived.
And he used to live in Antwerp before the war and he was in Antwerp quite a known person.
They were sweethearts before the war and it was quite  you know--as a matter of fact  she lost her husband in the '67 War.
I mean  in my dreams or in my feelings and hopes  that if I survive  the war is over  we're only a few miles from Zagreb  we will go back.
It a pharmacist  the Coens had two little girls  Doris and Hannah   who they had managed to send to England with the last Kindertransport  in August Interview with Dorothea Fingerhood April 27  2017 51 1939  days before the outbreak of the war.
The Ustaıe in World War II Croatia wanted to Interview with Gerhard Weinberg March 13  2012 78 kill Serbs who lived in Croatia.
You know  everything was Ill see you after the war  you know.
Q. Were you active before the war  were you involved with any political authorities?
Were there any other names that you went by  e ither first name or last name  during the war years?
And ever ybody was so involved emotionally a nd I'm involved emotionally  too  but I cannot escape from the politics of the situation a nd the difficulty of deciding to take these indicted war criminals out of Bosnia and deliver them to the Hague if you are in e ffect the United States of America.
Before we turn to those war years  let's start  Margit  with you giving us a sense of your family  your parents  your life in those pre -war years in fact  those years before you moved to Par is.
He was caught after the war in the and he was telling the things that he was doing for us.
The Chateau de Marjolet  was that Oh  this was after the war  this was L: Yeah  this was at the end.
I dont go there  cause I found out that they beha -- behaved during the war  and af ter the war  worse than the Germans  worse than the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0064 86 Germans.
He -- he sat at home  when he retired from working  and after the war  until he went to bed  he sat at home in the living room  with reading  with a tie  jacket and shoes on.
We both for the war  he was against Nazism  he escaped to the partisans because he did not want to be drafted to go to Germany  to work with the Nazis.
And Germany was very interested in gearing up their ammunition production for the war.
You told me that Kristallnacht  Night of the Broken Glass or broken glass  was the catalyst for the decisions and direction that your family's life took for the balance of the Holocaust and the war itself.
13 A I mean  if a telephone is proof that you are a middle class family  so we all had a telephone until the end of the war.
They retreated and then they came back after the war ended.
Yeah  that that part was Ger-German  but after the war  they became Polish.
>> Bill Benson: You do have to tell us about at the end of the war reuniting with your father.
And before the war  to me  the Jews werent any different from anybody else.
It's only actually towards the very  very end of the war when I think he had an inkling that his parents had disappeared  that he became a little more sad and more  less expansive  less talkative.
I remember that during the war they used to roll in a piece of paper and I dont even think they had tobacco; I think they had crushed leaves or something.
They wanted  also  after the war  not to give me back  they wanted to adopt me when my uncle ca me and stayed.
Or the year he paid the bills for the Swiss sanitarium my uncle stayed at after the war to put on fat.
After the war the Catholic mission from Germany brought all th e orphans to the United States as orphans refugees.
Didn't do any damage  but another bomb by mistake hit the British prisoners of war.
It was a quite different country because when you live in a country occupied (cough) and go to another country who haven't got the same feelings as we  to them the Germans were not so bad as we thought because they had the relationship with Finland and with the Finnish-Russian War and all this.
When -- Before the war was your father's business catering to all different kinds of customers  Jews  nonJews?
My father knew  he was in the first war in 1914  he was at the war  so he knew how to speak Russia  French.
I had a chance after the war to take revenge  like the Turks after the genocide took place in 1915 in Turkey where a million people were killed  and I had a chance maybe to kill some German Nazis.
I -- I just -- as you were ta lking I realized that I didnt -- I didnt ask you when did you realize there was a war going on?
And th of course  when the war starte d  thats another long story.
Mom said  I don't want you to smoke until after the war.
Reese  after -after the war  after he came back to the United States  he made some trips to -to Israel and became very friendly with especially with my brother.
When the real war -- when the Phoney War was opened -- I don't know if you know that.
So  from now on she was -- she was handling this  and I was to get myself back to the office  before the people -- and I had people whom I knew from -- from before the war  most accountants I knew  and they knew me and so on.
Later on maybe on when the war started in with Russia  then it was harder.
And then after the war  my parents had two more children.
When the war broke out  he was in the States  she was left with the two childre n. She had to care for her two children in the ghetto.
When the war started  he found himself as a young boy -- >> Bill Benson: By himself?
And my mother wanted  on top of it  she wanted the awards that my father had got at the First World War.
It sounds that despite your schooling and despite your plans the key career decision in your life was made at Auschwitz.. Yeah  that was my bread and butter after the war.
In the beginning of the war you could do almost a lot of things  but the Germans were not organized yet.
So I  to this day I all the father was discovered after the war with oh  with an English revolver or something  and of course that was in East Germany  and so he was in prison and then he was sent to Siberia  where he died.
Lets ha lets before we talk about that  want to move back to life before the war  though.
And I was wondering if you have any thoughts a bout the Korean war or the war in Vietnam.
And my father said to me that he had fought for Germany in World War I  and nothing would happen to me  that Germany had had waves of anti-Semitism previously  they come and they go  and because of our of our nature  of what my father has achieved  what he had done  he would protect me  and no thing would happen to us.
Why we didn't go away from Hungary  I have no idea because I had a cousin  my late father's late brother who died also before the war  who immigrated to Argentina.
What sort of network wa s there among Jews in gene ral and Jews from the war?
And after that my mother decided to change schools and I then went on  took a tramway actually to go back to take -- to -- to attend the school in the neighborhood wher e we had lived before the war  because my mother really felt those were the better schools.
The question that I gave Mr. Shulim to read is that many people would be very upset and hurt to hear that the Jews are somehow responsible for what happene d to them during World War II and is this what he meant to say.
And we were talking about what I assume was part of the battle of Manila  at the very end of the war in the Pacific against the Japanese  or close to the end.
Yes  they uh...the Russians uh didn't come around again to get me  at least  and then the war ended in '45.
She stayed in Italy  and looked after my grandmother  and did some quite courageous and remarkable things during the war.
He was a baby and the parents gave him to Polacks  of course fo r a lot of money  and they after the war they just said go  go  and some of the Je ws picked him up and they brought him to Lublin.
He was captured as an Austrian prisoner of war and wh en they took him out of that prison  it was going from whites to reds  from whites to reds  and the reds --- Youre talking about World War I and then the Revolution?
And so I went  and that was a very terrible experience because that was th e end of the war; you know  you could see the defeat in the soldiers' face.
The temples were burned; every Jewish store was broken up  and that's what it was  so that's what life was before the war.
Hongkew was a part of Shanghai that had been devastated during the war between the Japanese 33 and the Chinese.
