T his was a ghetto but not in the idea of a ghetto like in Warsaw  this was a ghetto  this was a settlement of Jews which were surrounded by barbed wire and constantly watched so there was no way out.
I started running into the ghetto and I was chasing the cow  and the cow run until I grabbed the cow and pulled her and back put it back where the cow belonged.
3 Mordechai Chaim Rumkowski (1877-1944); Chai rman of the Judenrat in the Lodz ghetto.
In the ghetto there were no more wooden fences being built--use them for fuel to keep our houses warm in the winter time.
I am a private man now  so I was put in another kibbutz of young people with the supervision of Jewish soldiers in Mestre   Mestre it very close to Venice  and we spend there a very nice Rosh Hashana  in the ghetto  Venice  in the Nafi of the English Army  with a chaplain  evrything  very nice.
They came from Warsaw to the Lodz ghetto and they told us about the Warsaw ghetto.
But still  if you  I didnt look Jewish  I could have gone wherever  but they knew me and they could tell it to please the Germans.
End of Tape One  Side B Interview with Werner Katzenstein October 17  2001 36Beginning Tape Two  Side A This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Werner Katzenstein.
Okay  just tell me in a very broad outlin e  the creation of the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/DAVID LEVINE page 6 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: or got killed  we sort of gave a name to every group of people disappeared.
He says  well  they took the thing over to the ghetto or things.
So they took a forced labor out of the ghetto  so we should work in the...in the...in the construction there.
So Im not sure if -- if there s a -- a difference  or if you want to just talk about what kind of work your father was still able to do  and was there a difference between when the ghetto was not yet sealed and when it was sealed?
And as I said  it was th-the more elite part of the ghetto that we were brought to.
Well  first of all  I was too young to go to work.
The majority of people left the bulk of their furniture or posessions in their apartment and moved to Ghetto.
The ghetto people went out to work and there was a lot of cultural activity in the ghetto that came to me as a total surprise.
He was out of town somewhere  but we came in  we came to the house.
But some people  yes  y eah  they worked ou-outside the ghetto.
And she  when she saw the disaster in the ghetto  she put her child under a convents door.
Look  when we came into the ghetto  we tried to ma intain the same life style that we had before the ghetto  because we didn't know what the next day will bring.
It went through  all through the ghetto  that street where the  where the gate was.
And they wouldn't cut him down until every individual that was on a work detail  had to be marche d out and had to watch him hanging there  and after every individual had seen him  those that were away outside of the ghetto  at work  on the way home they had to pass by his gallows before they would allow them to go home  before they would cut him down.
Even in this museum I saw a Jewish girl writing in ghetto her d her diary in Lithuanian because she she ju-just didnt know ji Yiddish that well.
And there used to be Jewish police  you know about that?
By this time June rolled around  and all of a sudden  all of a sudden on a Sunday  a strange army rolled around th e ghetto.
It was the highlight in the ghetto to get a package for those things.
So the move from your house into the ghetto  you don' t remember?
They wanted to interview her for the museum and the one  the youngest son who was in the ghetto with her parents.
So they all left with the first liquida tion of the ghetto  and anyways  that's how I spent my time in  in camp  with the stories  and the encour agement  and the  the love that my mother was able to give me.
And this was going on for the time we were in the little ghetto.
While the activities were taking place  were the Jewish residents living in what could be described as a ghetto at that time  or did that come later?
One morning  I went out again to be  to be wait  to look for the opportunity to be captured and taken to units outside the ghetto that I would be able to bring in some food.
Then the Germans started bringing the Jews all over Europe from France  from Germany  and packed them into the Lodz ghetto.
And one day he was arrested in the ghetto for killing his mother and keeping her body in his place  and using his -- her ration cards to get bread.
I had met the Eichengreens on the way to the ghetto.
I could run through before the assessment checked by paper I was gone already anyhow  but I had legitimate papers anyhow to go from the Ghetto  and I was afraid to go back in.
And but the ran radio was full of Goering not Goerings   but Goebbels saying that God saved Hitler and he has hes has to have a s Gods help to let him stay alive and all that  otherwise he would but then wh en they started except that when they started hanging up the people who were do ing it  that was at the same time that I think the Warsaw up ghetto uprising was going on  I think  so that That was spring of 43 was the Warsaw ghetto.
Are there any sights today or sounds or smells that bring back the war years for you  in todays world  anything that reminds you or I dont believe so.
Of Interview with J udith Heimann November 21  2011 4course  like all Jews  they originally lived in the ghetto in Frankfurt   and they were moneychangers  I guess.
So  uh we had this beautiful  beautiful  uh  synagogue  and houses around it became the ghetto.
One on one side or like barracks or like places that work  and one on the other side and in the middle was like a big  big street  and we walked to the ghetto works and we walk in.
Well  we ran for about a little mile to a ------ and there was shooting but they didn't hurt us  but then finally one of those guards ran after us  beat my husband up -- he still has a permanent scar in his eye  no vision  and called us all kinds of names and told us \ back to the ghetto you go.\
Q. Now  did you practice the reli gion at all while you were living in the ghetto?
Also I remember in ghetto  I did have two thi ngs happen to me that were a little unusual.
I met Tosia Altman with the young girls from the ghetto  and we all went to the ghetto in Krakow.
My mother did escape with me from the ghetto  and somehow were back in the ghetto.
So he he...and I don't remember that I mentioned it yesterday that the commandant of the ghetto  mostly they were elderly men and they were not so  you know  fanatic like this  so they had understanding...he had understanding for this and he tells me alright  I give you two hours  two hours to go in into the into the...so I said I need a uh a wagon  you know  but I didn't need a wagon.
And then I had to leave the ghetto in the evening at six oclock with the brigade  which went to town to work.
Interview with William Klein October 18  1993 12 So when did you have to move from your home to this ghetto in Užhorod ?
18 Not a very liked person  because he used to take bribes from people who were in Ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 28 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: Verchstaten--you know where they uh--and there we even met up with a few of our friends.
You see  in large Ghetto I was such a low level of living that I really don't know what was going on  but we know -- the whole administration and when I read this book about Lodz Ghetto  one time he had theaters here and orphanages  he had schools  he was making the famous speech  give me your children  he felt justified in sending out the children because maybe he can save some people.
And after awhile  which I dont really remember how long  they formed a ghetto in my hometown  an d everybody from all the villages and different neighborhoods our house was in the ghetto.
And you were able to go in and out of the ghetto before [indecipherable] Yes  yes  there were possibility and I -- I went several times.
Escape from the ghetto we couldn't...we couldn't d o. If we escape  a Lithuanian saw us and you were a Jew  he told the Germans on us.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/PNINA TORY page 13 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: health  we had only one suitcase and put some clotheses in his the diary.
At a time a when Jewish were still walking back and forth from Kovno ghetto  from Kovno 23 Horse-drawn buggy.
The first few years in Ghetto  we had to take care of the older people  no matter what.
All of those in the international ghetto must remain where they are or all those in the common ghetto must be  must have electricity and wate r  so forth again  because those people have to survive too because what would what would happen of the Hungarian people  so I repeated to him again and all the stories about vendettas  terrible vendettas and uh the Anglo-Americans uh who would come to bomb ard the city and so forth and so on.
But  nevertheless  we were very  very fortunate because we moved into international ghetto  which is basically the protected houses.
I [indecipherable] my mother to o  but my father -- even in ghetto -- can I tell you this?
And some of those families were in a camp  but in -- n-not of the same camp.
By the way I forgot to tell that before we went away from the ghetto they already took away all the Jewelry except each one of us was trying to hide a memento.
A block or two blocks away  we could hear already the shooting coming into the ghetto.
Everything in I brought in from in the ghetto from a man  and uh you take the to the and I will call downtown  like   the building...the engineer  with a couple more children.
There was all over the place ghetto was clothes as much as you want.
And I was working was in this same place here after the liquidation of the ghetto.
I couldn't ta ke it  so this is the time when I went into the Warsaw  to the Warsaw ghetto.
And did they have  where they happy  how could they be happy in the ghetto.
Q. Were the Jewish police good to the community or not?
Laughter] >> Bill Benson: In the late summer of 1944  you were sent to yet another concentration camp  Stutthof.
And there he said  ﬁI want you to take over the labor department because we have to register every Jew  every child in the ghetto because we have to give them work.ﬂ For work we will get bread and we can live.
I was the enem y of these people that said for Wittenberg to give up and to not to rage and to fight  not to fight back because the ghetto will be destroyed.
>> Bill Benson: You shared with me that when the edict was given to abolish the ghetto  it was to be done in three days as a gift to Hitler for his birthday and it took 30 days  took a month to accomplish.
And the final life in the ghetto was until May the 20th.
And then they liquidated the ghetto and they got rid of those houses 23 with the people they were hidden in it.
And and and I still received a letter in the ghetto  even before me.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BRIGITTE ALTMAN page 26 Interviewed (5-5-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: B Yes  so the preliminary plans that had to be made were to establish contact with a former bookkeeper from who had worked for my dad in our  in my home town.
for Jews in October 1940  and then the Jews move into the ghetto area  do you -- Must move in -- Must move by November  right? --
There was a -- there was a man Bergman he was also from the ghetto.
He asked the other men to stay in the forest a little bit far away and he would go to the ghetto himself.
After this the ghetto was liquidated because it can happen again and the ghetto was liquidated.
They were also the people that the life of the ghetto depe nd on  because they had the strength to work  and the older generation was sort of losing this physical strength of working the factories.
But we could -- I could still see the starving Jews who would escape from ghetto and die on the pavement from -- from starvation.
My father went because he helped to dig the grave in the cemetery and he knew exactly where  but the children weren't allowed to go out of the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 26 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: all loaded up in cattle cars.
At that time  it was not a question of hiding  because there was no ghetto  this was not a ghetto.
And the ghetto  there were no Jews around that area anymore  and no Jews in Krakow except in the ghetto.
Do y -- do you remember seeing things that were happening in Warsaw in relation to the Jewish community?
AT: Oh   this is the  the list of the streets of the ghetto.
Well  after we got out of the ghetto -- How did you get out?
The ghetto been existing from cabbage  what the Germans been giving the Jews for working for the airport.
>> Rae Goldfarb: Before even the ghetto  the Jews were instructed to mark their clothing by sewing on a Star of David in the color of yellow.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview & Readings w/AVRAHAM TORY page 15 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: Did people burn furniture to keep warm.
People we knew from the ghetto -- one particular one told us one time when he came back  he said  Yes  I've seen your father about a month beforehand; he was transferred further east but he was in good condition.
Maybe this woman knows that I have already this twelve Jews.
Could you tell me your recollections about getting adjusted in the ghetto  living conditions?
We were put in a ghetto where life was pretty pretty horrible and soon after they divided like the old town and the new town and for some reason we ended up in the old town because my father wanted to be with his mother  with my grandmother and when the first order was to get the Jews out of town  they didn't tell us they were going to kill them.
And then there was the decr ee about moving to the ghetto.
And very seldom do they took seven  a family of with seven  eight  nine people into the ghetto.
That evening when we were 14 coming back from work  blocks and blocks aw ay from the ghetto  Linda  we heard cries  such cries I hope nobody will hear.
It was a part of the ghetto where you used to cross from one...from one side to the other  under guard.
So he was sending in to the ghetto things like cacao  tea  rice  something like it -- it was -- what he couldnt touch  and told not to touch it.
However once they liquidated the ghetto  everybody was sent to a different directions.
We were in April...it was the beginning of April...I think we were invaded around the end of March  and in April already we were in the ghetto.
Ghetto consisted of two sections  the main Ghetto and Small Ghetto.
When I was in my cousins apartment  it wasnt -- not very big apartment; other people helped my parents to get out -- of ghetto.
One which affected us was that Jewish people had to leave their homes and move either to the ghetto which was set up in mid 1944 in the traditional Jewish area of Budapest or certain designa ted houses where Jews could live.
His aunt and sh -- and so we -- in the ghetto  she had a -- her ow -- flat in the ghetto.
This this was a very difficult experience for him  for all of us  because he felt this was killing him  because he knew the swelling was going up and up  which is very characteristic of the way people died in th e ghetto  as you know.
Irving: Well  yeah  the ghetto  things in the ghetto started getting worse and worse.
Bec ause the Christian people had to vacate the areas that were designated as the ghetto and find homes.
Before I left him  my father told me news was spreading that theyre going to liquidate the ghetto.
One had a little better than the other one  even with my people  still  I had to watch myse lf  so I went to the president of the ghetto  his name was Vorshotsky  he was a very dear friend of my fathers  and I told him  \ I understand that you have tomorrow a transport going to different work ing camps out of the city.\
I lost touch with her when I went into ghetto because I had so much on my mind.
And well  in my opinion it was like an oasis in that terrible ghetto  you know  which was nothing but...I would name it a cesspool of  of human  of humanity.
When they  when they started to liquidate the ghetto they needed Jewish workers to clean the ghetto  the apartments   sort them out and send them to Germany.
Selling old clothes  selling a pa ir of pants  buying a pair of shoes  you couldn't even buy food on the street in the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/CELIA YEWLOW page 26 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: Okay  lets cut for a second. (
It happens that the rabbi's travel plans didn't work out quite as predicted  so here we come  four people and the rabbi and his wife with the wig  the little girl  you know  snotty nose  white socks  I mean  just  you know  from the ghetto  from Poland  this is how it looked to me.
2 This event  which constituted the liquidation of the ghetto  took place from August 20 to August 24  1942.
What was  when you said you were there at the beginning of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising... Oh no  I was only that day.
To give  to help to to supply these the ghetto was Komo Otto's work and several people who was helping for him and the remains the the children children home only with the children.
There were two apartments to the same floor and he lived in one of them.
This was all about Strassenhof and some girls came pregnant from the ghetto in the beginning  they had the husbands.
had been in the ghetto  and were all moved together to the airport.
So  my husband said to him  \ I have no money but we would like to get out of the ghetto.\
Tell us  you walked out of the ghetto  which was not easy to do.
And then we had to go to the ghetto of Minsk.
Then comes along a friend of Vondas  whom she knew from ghetto.
Did one have to pay  use the money from the ghetto to go  or was this free?
See  my father was -- it happened s -- I think was in Oct-October -- October 1992  we were at that time still in the ghetto  I remember we were operating our group and it came an order the same that all the Jews for the ghetto h-had to get certain -- certain -- certain warning to get ready ce-certain place  this was  I think be -- by the -- by the market in the center of the city  and be ready for transportation the same way as the last time.
They kept everybody in this ghetto  then chased us out of the ghetto into a more open field.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 28 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: time  I worked in Mole and that was uh building a underground air--airport for the Germans.
Were you in the ghetto already or were you still in your own home.
So my father arranged with the guy that was guiding all the laborers out and into the ghetto  he bribed him.
And it happened to be isolated away from the residents of the ghetto.
In the ghetto we slept across the bed because there were so many people to start with.
At the time when are you ta lking about the ghetto years?
It was a small ghetto...was two ghettos in fact  a small ghetto where they had a little hospital and they put the old people in the hospital  and then there was a larger ghetto.
We had no contact with the German police  because first you had to if you had the papers to go out of the ghetto  you had to present them to the Jewish police.
And now a terrific fright and concern gripped everyone in the ghetto  because the Germans -- a few Germans kept all these thousands of Jews in check by imposing corrective punishment.
That's made out in my name but of cour se I never used it because I never went to ghetto.
And you saw people jumping from roof to roof while the ghetto uprising was going on?
Tell us about the ghetto and what conditions were like for you there.
>> Bill Benson: The ghetto  at the start of 1943  the ghetto was subdivided into three sub ghettos.
The other partners decided to come into the ghetto too  to be with the spouses.
Major  I   should I stay or go?ﬂ He said  ﬁStay.ﬂ So I took wi th Lotte this cart which had all the belongings of the 11 of us and we took it out of the streets leading to the railway station into a part of the ghetto we were supposed to leave the next days.
Actually first we moved -- it wasn't the Small Ghetto  it was where everybody was.
What happened was that they decided our numbers had dwindled a nd they didnt need such a spacious place as we had there and they moved us to a smaller ghetto and that was really one of the shabbiest parts of town.
>> Bill Benson: At some point soon after you were forced into the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 19 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: tion of interview with Miriam Gerchwin.
And he was the first one who left the ghetto  which -- you know  very -- the ghetto was still existing when we were trying  you know  to arm ourselves.
First we went to a ghetto  which was a short duration.
I just had no -- no concept  no - I knew about camps  I knew about this  I knew about the -- the -- the -- the -- the Warsaw ghetto  of course  but I -- I just somehow in my mind  I -- I didnt rea lly have that -- that -- that -- that concept of this -- this -- this enormity of that -- of that thing  especially where the -- with all the families of my father  or all these -- these schoolmates and classmates and the -- and kids that I  for years you know  played with and grew up with and went to school with  you know  I mean Im talking about dozens and dozens of -- of -- of -- of -- of kids  you know  like through the grades  and -- and -- and so forth.
And -- so they start bringing in in Proushinna ghettos  of ssome -- those that are fortunate and the ghetto swelled from about -- we had -- like is mentioned  6000 Jews  1000 from here  2000 from here  so finally the ghetto swelled to 12 000.
Obviously the people who left the ghetto or were probably shot  they were frightened by that  did people realize what it was pointing toward?
My oldest brother  who didn't survive  he used to go out with the daughter of the president of the ghetto.
Not long after that  we stayed in that ghetto -- you want to say something?
They liquidate the Jewish people in the ge -- in the Wilna ghetto.
So  was the Umschlagplatz within the space of the ghetto  or outside of it?
Did you have a good or bad impression of the Jewish police in the ghetto?
Therefore she had to move out of that apartment and come back and live with my grandmother in that Jewish ghetto.
One man had been taken along from the ghetto beside s us 50 girls who operated the soup kettles.
My mother and my father were so weak that the trip from where we were in the ghetto to our prior house  which is normally was like 35  40 minutes  would take four hours.
I -- I dont think its a ghetto in the common sense today  but it was an area that was populated mostly by Jews  and the synagogue with the Cologne synagogue was there  the one of the major ones was right in that area  very near by.
But when you do nt know anything -- but even in the Munkac ghetto  you had no idea that were gonna wind up in Auschwitz .
Was I lear ned the same evening  was because the Germans have left the ghetto intact.
A Jew was not allowed to dry -- to USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0061 8ride the train  or go out after seven ocl ock from the ghetto  to be seen on a street.
And after that what normally happened was that the group would stay in the same kibbutz and become part of the kibbutz in which they had been for two years as regular members of the kibbutz.
And this was a different  this was a diffe rent ghetto.
So they figured  and one  a sister with a brother was with me  but they had to  when I went out from the ghetto  there were two in the group with me  but where they are now  I said  \ I don't know  they probably went  they took them to the gestapo\ .
And was the ghetto  were there Germans in the ghetto or was it all self-patrolled?
And then they used to pick some -- find some Jews from the outside -- for instance  and somebody survived and they used to drop him in in the ghetto.
I think the whole ghetto thing was very short  well  maybe six months.
The ghetto they  the Germans came with the help of the Polish police  they chased all people out from the ghetto  who cannot run fast enough was kille d on the spot  and they transported them to the Lobartov.
Unlike in Lvov  for example  89 where -- where there were just volunteers galore  you know  to -- to help to enter the ghetto.
And he got my mother  my father  my baby sister and me out.
We went to the  in Raddan was a ghetto  we we nt to the Raddan ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/PNINA TORY page 15 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: to bother with a place in the ghetto but when the time came near and there was going to  the  they to close the ghetto I had to move.
What...you said things were coming back to you from the ghetto.
I came across the name of Osher  Heinrich Osher in the chronicles of Lodz ghetto  that the -- put it in context  that there was a Heinrich Osher who married a Gentile woman  and lived outside the ghetto  and that Pr uschidsky puts together some kind of a story about it.
Yo u went out to work when you were in the ghetto?
I don't think I know very much more about the specific ghetto experience.
He went to th e ghetto  and...uh...an d...the only way I hear d from him was the day when I was in Juliana's house in another room with...uh...with the Blachowicz family which lives in Israel.
What kind of neighborhood did you and your family live in after the war?
And lo and behold  three months after she was taken to this Sudetenland we got...we received a letter from the Jewish Community that she is coming home  and two days later...really three months after she had left...she went...she left home  she came in from German ... from Sudetenland to the ghetto on a train with her belongings.
They really transformed the ghetto in a work uh Laga--in a work force.
We all had to march by there to teach us a lesson not to bring home anything to the ghetto.
The Jews came from Germany  but they were sent straight to the 9th Fortress and were killed the very same day and the part  the area was cut off from the ghetto.
When we are talking in the beginning of the ghetto  we feel that we are together in one bad position  and we didn't know what we knew afterwards.
In our home he did not  but after they brought us into the ghetto  he build a place of hiding.
I was in [indecipherable] well  I didnt do other things either  but I didnt tell you how we went to the ghetto yet  so -- No  ar -- no  were not even there yet.
Yes  the streetcars were going to through the main main thoroughfares  through Warsaw   and through ghetto  with the the streetcar  our streetcars  the Aryan side  used to have the numbers.
You talk to the Arbeitsamt  to the Komitet in the ghetto works  so he went in and it was already late  and he said to me...that one of the men said  he says  you know  Herr Saposhnikov  he says  there is one brigade  a German and six girls to clean up a house...would you daughter be happy to do that?
They're gonna make us form a ghetto  which in this time  we already moved several times to smaller apartmen ts  smaller apartments  you know  different places.
And the ghetto was cl osed off in October of 1940.
We lived in the ghetto under strict curfew conditions and had no access to doctors or drugstores.
Do you want to move on to your escape from this ghetto.
I guess the Germans were afraid it could happen also in other places  which actually at one time there was a resistance in our ghetto but they were caught.
No  no  the Jewish star that you were you had to wear before in the ghetto  what did you do with it?
And they gave us -- I got a new pair of pants from somebody  from the ghetto.
They forced uh these Jews from the countryside to come back to B udapest and...those who had left Budapest...and they concentrated them in the old ghetto  which could support maybe two  three million people...not fifty or sixty...two or three thousand people  not fifty or sixty thousand people  and so there was this black  terrible hunger.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 10 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: we took them out and I  I mean unfortunately  they didn't survive but at that time I saved them.
I mean  did certain people have to go outside of the ghetto to try to bring in more food?
Only if a man what he was in concentration camp and he was in ghetto from 1939 til 1945  yes  this book you should read  this is true.
If you escape  you want to go for example which this happened  people try to escape from ghetto to Vashow  or to go into Russia  so just for---------at that time  they been caught and shot  and this is  this is a daily occurrence  and mainly they start to escape at the Jewish cemetery  and I'm talking about Lodz  I'm strictly talking about Lodz  which in German  of course  was Lichmenstadt.
Do you -- were you aware of efforts to sabotage work in the factories  or for people to try to get out of the ghetto  any kind of resistance?
They built a huge wooden wall around the ghetto and  according to the rumors  they would just detonate the whole thing or burn it down or  but they would not let the Jews survive if the si ege had lasted another week or so.
At some point we were told that the ghetto was going to be built.
So I I went in and out in the ghetto  and the wom the woman told me that you think I didnt see what you doing?
The moment they started importing people for execution  for exporting  they changed it and I've got the order where it was changed from a ghetto to a concentration camp  Konzentrations Lager  so that when it became a concentration camp  the people had different ways of at least hiding something that if you got out or were able to  you could barter with it.
Can you describe  approximately where -- where this labor camp was?
RG-50.030*0580 16 So  do you remember any any contacts with your peers there  other people your age in the ghetto  or or you were spending most of the time with the family?
So I went to a friend what I know he was in ghetto  and I asked him what to do.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 8 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: uh--you know--who I knew and uh I went out with him a few times.
I hear that people in Lodz before the ghetto was sealed... Closed.
If we want to survive  the 100 000 Jews which at the point were locked up in the ghetto want to survive  they have to give up 20 000.
But talking about that  anything what you hear in the Ghetto is dead.
We did all right away like I say from the milk woman  this was from the fields they...they in the ghetto when they came in  in...in September  in June...uh...1941  so we have know right away what they are doing.
When they made the little ghetto  that was where the Jewish quarter used to be before the war.
As a matter of fact  before the ghetto  he told me: Look  the situation is getting very bad.
Now  you were living in the small ghetto  and very early in the life of the ghetto  the small ghetto was liquidated  correct?
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 27 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: nobody but uh we wound up having uh pork  for example uh cause there was hardly any meat in the uh ghetto and from the rations that I recall.
Things started getting worse and by the end of 1941 they made the Ghetto in our town.
From what I remember  it wasnt  you know like the Polish Jews were in ghettos for years  but this wasnt a work ghetto.
We didn't have too many and there was also no time to socialize in the ghetto.
Now  t wo days later  after this transport left.... And prior to that  there were also surround...surroundings of...of local people  of the people in the ghetto by the Germans [ NB: razzias].
But  you know  people would look at those lis ts and also append their own queries about the whereabouts of their families  and who went where  and who is likely to have been in this or in that ghetto  or who is likely to have information about the fate of individual persons.
I was in Budapest for the last 2 years living without papers  and uh the SS  the  the Nazis came into Budapest and uh I wanted by all means to be with my family because there was nowhere that I could hide anymore  and I was determined under  under any circumstances to reach my mother  my sister and uh  whatever would happen to them  I want ed to be with them  and we knew already that there will be a ghetto and that uh  I cannot uh  uh save myself anyway  and I didn't want to save myself to begin with  I wanted to be with my family.
When you were -- one ques tion the museum had was  when you were in the ghetto  before you were sent to Auschwitz -- Yeah  yeah?
It wasnt the barracks  it was a little house by itself.
I knew if he was in this ghetto  if he's in this ghetto maybe  maybe he's someplace.
Thats when the mass killings started  and actually  the-they started -- the --the -- all the killings were in -- in the -- in the Kovno ghetto in Lithuania.
Did let me ask you a couple other questions about the ghetto.
Tell me some other things about ghetto life  before we get to that point.
We had a -- an old age home in the building and the people were dying by -- >> Bill Benson: And again  the importance here is that you're forced into a ghetto.
You will stay.ﬂ And the day after  they op ened a few more streets for the ghetto and we got into a very good 8 house belonging to uncle of Lottes where we stayed for the next  ‚til the end of the ghetto.
My grandmother lived w ith is in Warsaw and during the time  wartime  she didnt get any letter from her daughter in Lodz ghetto.
And so  everybody went it was no big problem to go into the ghetto because nobody knew what is going to happen.
By that time I had to make the decision  should I take the chan ce and go with him to Vilna or I mean  I wasnt sure anyway but it still probably safer than to go back to the ghetto.
After the ghetto experiences and hiding  I sort of saved myself by going to school instead of being forced to go into the Russian army and become artillery meat.
You know so in that respect  even though being in ghetto  they helped us often.
But I'm just tr ying -- let's go back a little bit to the summer of 1941 and how the ghetto came about.
Instead  the ghetto hospital sent a surgeon  accompanied by a laboratory technician who used some hand held dish for typing the blood of several volunteers  including my brother Moshe.
And so my mother put on the men's clothing and took my sister under her arm and my father took me under his arm  and we marched out of the ghetto.
Mother left me with a family that provided us with transportation to the other ghetto.
He used to bring in from the food of the horses  he used to bring into the ghetto.
Because -- because we all lived -- we all lived in a ghetto.
And when a sondercommander came in  means something will be happening -- will be happening in the ghetto.
Was your family deported or did they die in the ghetto?
In January of 1945  the Sov iet Army liberated the 800 remaining Jews from the Lodz ghetto.
Now also  we were kissing everybody and he had to leave us and to told that the group came from the ghetto.
When they were hidden in the public washroom  they looked out of a little window and when Aron saw that Tadek is there  he went out to talk to Tadek and he begged Tadek to take another person.
But appare ntly all these things that the Germans put in operation to strangulate the economic life of the Warsaw Ghetto and to bring the demise of the Jews  didnt happen for them fast enough.
So  everybody was working and everybody produced something  and we produced and the Ghetto was getting food.
And then his wife  and they was taking them back to ghetto under guard -- I don't know how -- she run away.
The only successful hiding  successful survivals outside that I know of were very brave women who got out of the ghetto and managed to survive some in other towns.
I don't have to get...to the back ghetto now  because my parents and my sister are gone.
This was our luck  and in the morning the ghetto was completely empty  the small ghetto  and we could hear in the night the machine guns and the shooting  because the Nitenfort was not really far away from the ghetto.
Did you know where things were happening in other places in the camp?
Take her out of here immediately.ﬂ So then Aron approached Bauer  evidently while the ghetto was burning  and when Bauer passed by and saw the shooting and the killing–he was a decent human being and that he was terribly upset.
There were ten people on the floor sleeping and as I was dressing I looked out of the window that was leading outside the ghetto and I see trucks  German trucks with soldiers  a whole column going towards the ghetto gate and as they were riding down towards the gate they were dropping off Polish policemen across the street to stand guard watching the ghetto.
>> Bill Benson: You described that to me as a terrific birthday present.
The war was around the ghetto and we had we had to move to the ghetto.
When the school -- and that -- I -- well  my address in the ghetto was Berka Joselewicza 60 Brunnenstrasse 16.
And the whole world was being turned upside down and he hustled us out  the three of us  and this police officer from the ghetto  out to the street and on the street is this police captain's small Italian car  which is enough for three people maybe and inside the car is my father and he says  get in  so in gets my mother and the two of us  my brother and I sitting on their laps and he says to the police  the police sits in the front and he's at the driver side  the police captain  he says put your rifle on these  these are dangerous people  the least chance  shoot them.
Interview with Hannah Kalman May 20  1999 18 They were inside the ghetto  but they were we were they wa we got wires  so we got only the sidewalks and he was walking in the middle of this [indecipherable] the streetcars passed  yeah  yeah.
Maybe the ghetto they started doing about two or three months later.
Tell me a little bit about the ghetto life and the Jewish consul and all of that.
2) Bella in 1942 in the Sosnowiec ghetto with a friend.
Now  I understand [tape blank for an interval  then resumes] Were there people also working in the ghetto?
Did you know about a ny resistance being organized in the ghetto itself.
Later in the evening I heard about about the Jews remaining RG-50.030*0580 45remaining alive  following which days later  we knew that it was it wasnt true  that the Germans didnt leave Jews alive  but at that time but Rumkowski was del-de-delirious with happiness that that the chances that the Jews were and the other people in the ghetto Tho-Those were the Jews who were departed during the gaspara  right?
Oh  was terrible in the ghetto this time  was terrible  because it was -- there was a -- like a few different group of the people in the ghetto  was terrible  because some was pretty rich Jewish people  and some were -- most was very poor.
And I had some encounters with the ghetto police when I was there briefly.
And then I went to visit my  by then my mother and father and Uncle and Aunt and my brother and my sister moved to the ghetto.
It seems to me going back from ghetto to and here I'm blank a certain period of time that I cannot recall.
We realized it  we said to ourselves  from th e ghetto would be a good chance to escape  because theres just a picket fence and thats it.
At that time the ghetto wasn't so hard to get out of the ghetto.
And he  they ran into each other in the ghetto and he arranged for them to work in a factory outside the gates  which was supposed to be a slightly protected situation so that every day they would all go out to work.
The Germans didnt -- when the Judenrat was established  the Germans didnt went in in the ghetto too often.
Ther e was only as I speculate d already that was one chance that some German official in the Krakow Plaszow ghetto was handed a list of who is going to Schindler.
In many ghetto and also in concentration camps and killing centers  the Nazi officials regularly had a children's action to call children from that ghetto to murder them  to call them from the ghetto or from the concentration camp.
Yeah  yeah  we were getting -- we were getting around  you know  in the ghetto in the beginning  meeting in some houses and spend  you know  talking about a situation and -- and playing chess and -- and still -- you know  cards  chess and -- and try to spend the time  see.
And it was  the thing was  you see  by April the whole -- everybody in Lodz had to be -- if he was caught outside th e ghetto  he was shot.
Otherwise the ghetto would be a quarter of a million people.
So he went to the commandant of the Ghetto and he told him that he can't find his family  and the commandant from the Ghetto came and they found us and we were on the wrong side of the action  because people that were on the side that we were on  they went to the Ninth Fort  and everybody got shot.
So what was your next move after the ghetto  what happened?
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 23 >> Bill Benson: Do you remember that  even though you were in the sanitarium?
This way  he was commuting  with a pi ece of paper  in and out of the ghetto.
This was a -- we arrived at Auschwit z. From the ghetto  no.
And she did take me out of the ghetto  I dont remember how  but I remember that my father was like crying when I left.
>> Rae Goldfarb: We went to another ghetto that was more distant with a much bigger town.
So  when you left the ghetto  there was you  your mother -- When we left -- when we went to the ghetto  we went the whole family.
Li ke for us  they threw us out from our house and to go into the ghetto  but he was there  so we came to live with him.
>> Bill Benson: Estelle  when you were forced to move into the ghetto along with several hundred thousand other Jews  in a compact area  a wall built around the ghetto  describe a little bit about that and what it looked like.
Q. What about institutions in the Ghetto  lik e hospitals or soup kitchens  did that kind of thing exist?
And before the Wars aw burning my father and me  we took three families from ghetto and we found location  not me   my father mostly --was very good person  very good Christian  and took the Christianity for daily not only during Sunday.
Each morning a group of maybe 40  50 people gathered in the ghetto area with a leader.
Irene was also -- I sent her to Marysin  a little bit outside  the periphery of the ghetto.
Not too long before the liquidation of the ghetto  the Germ ans knew exactly what was going on.
But  we decided to leave  and we decided to leav e on a Sunday where they theres less guards  fewer guards around the ghetto.
When -- can you describe to me what it was like when the Germans came?
And we came out  and I remember that after this round-up again  the ghetto ga -- was made smaller.
Do you ever talk to anyone a bout the ghetto though  before ---?
In th e morning they open up us and take us (they open us maybe 12:00 daytime) to the ghetto.
We have a frie nd in Haifa his name is Doctor Fuchs  she says  yes he delivered the mother and th e children  but he was one of the violinists during the Ghetto.
If 10 people walked out of the ghetto  10 had to return.
And then...then...uh...then...uh...the Germans  the...the...the Committee  the Jewi sh Committee was formed to transfer...to 12 arrange for the transfer of the regular  normal  as far as possible transfer of the Jews from Kovno to the ghetto.
Oh  three hundred maybe people  they come around for...for...and we stay in this...the Germans what they was doing in this time  they said  \ Who left in life  come back.
Once we were in that ghetto -- so when the bombs started to fall  we would run out to outside to fields.
Can you talk about that tension  about deciding whether or not to remain in the ghetto?
They fought from outside into the ghetto  when there was a point of fighting  yes?
Were -- were there -- a number of resistance groups in the ghetto?
At the point when there were very few people left in the ghetto  only the ghetto was reduced to three sub ghettos which were three separate streets.
And when we got there  the police -- chie f wa -- chief of the police said we will get one week from the -- that place  the [indecipherable]  and after that we will go back to the ghetto.
And it is in this ghetto where we first moved i n. In December of 1941 a young man came into the house.
No  no  it was not like tha -- bef -- before we went to ghetto it was no stars  but it was very dangerous to walk the street  especially the men.
This episode that you just described  th is flashback  this was before the ghetto uprising  long before?
That's where my mother worked  and as I said  after each deportation they re-registered and the ghetto was getting smaller.
Whatever we had went on that one little wagon and we were moved into a ghetto.
But meanwhile though your parents had settled in a basically Jewish area?
And the head of the ghetto wanted that money  of course  for the Gestapo.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BRIGITTE ALTMAN page 12 Interviewed (5-5-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: on the other side and we slowly walked  joined the rest of the gray mass that was walking in front of us.
There was a time already at  of -- where Jews had to wear armbands  and they were prior to the ghetto.
Did you have -- can you tell us when you first heard of the idea of the ghetto?
And the other ghetto was existed -- existed for not long  maybe a half a year.
>> Bill Benson: While you were in the Munkacs Ghetto  in the brick factory  I believe you told me you were shaved at that point.
Are you talking about a ghetto in Užhorod   or N-No  there was they were talking about what a ghetto is.
Q. Let's talk sort of ta lk a little bit more about the period before the Ghetto  okay?
He he I wa his father was a policeman  he was no in the ghetto  wasnt always negative.
And  the in the ghetto in Libau  did you know those people?
Did you when you went to work in the morning  did you leave the ghetto area?
Rome had a ghetto that they took them all and they took them to  north  where there was a concentration camp.
People from the woods came over and in a restaurant  a Jewish restaurant it was still a Jewish restaurant in the ghetto  and he gave me a compass.
We have to try to bring people from -- from the ghetto s. And he wrote a letter to his cousin  it was still in a -- in 28 [indecipherable] in Novagudek ghetto and he told him  organize as much as you can  because they had another pes -- farmer that spoke beautifu l Jewish  you would never sa -- say that hes a Gentile.
And that was going on...the ghetto was...each time you marched in at night.
Some apartments in the ghetto were in homes  were very deluxe.
As I heard later  the Germans have prepared to...uh...to put some bombs in the ghetto and...and to kill all the Jews who are there  but this didn't happen and when I arrived in...uh... Budapest the 17th of November  I took my life.... I knew already that my family is in Rome.
If there's going to be a ghetto in Lobartov  I always have time to go in--h ave a chance to run in.
And the Broczes which was in the small ghetto  they only work by Broczes .
I personally promised my Mom before they took her away to concentration camp that if I escaped from the ghetto  my town Lublin  she had asked me that I had to promise to her  if I ever survive.
Because while I was on the Aryan side already  I saw the ghetto burning and I heard all the remarks that the Polish people said because of the ghetto burning.
And they stayed overnight  in other words the ones who had been selected  they didnt come back to the ghetto  they went to the small ghetto  which was already empty.
But in the in our uprising  in in 1944  there were more Jewish-Polish freedom fighters than there were in the Jewish ghetto  which is very little known.
They came to each home - two Genda rmes - and delivered th em into the ghetto with their fifty kilos on their backs.
And they got -- they got a very  very hard time in the ghetto  you know.
I went out from the ghetto with my sister  we took off our rags  we went and we got some -- some blackberries and some bread  what I ask some of the peasants to give us.
And the ghetto  the entire gh etto was liquidated on November 17  1942.
And we returned  the next day we returned back to the ghetto  and here we found half of our friends  family were killed.
So only my father  my cousin and I were left in the ghetto.
We didn't have really a ghetto  it was certain streets - we wasn't allowed to go there - to walk.
When the ghetto changed into a concentration camp  do you remember that.
That was the extent of the living that we had in this house in Grodno in the ghetto.
Of course  it was a puny effo rt in comparison to th e need where you have half a million people  nearly half a million pe ople  starving in the walls of the ghetto.
And if youre at a certain point you can jump off and you were in the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/ETA HECHT page 4 Interviewed (5-5-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: EH: Yes  I knew about Hitler  I knew the name Hitler and that he was a bad guy.
Being...again we lived like on the 5th Avenue  my parents secured immediately an apartment in the future ghetto  and the always optimist Jew that we hoped war will end before we'll have to move.
And the next morning gates were opening and closing and cars trucks moving out  and the whole regiment of the police left the compound and there was no one left behind  and I waited until night  following night  and I through the fence I find my way back to the city  to the ghetto area.
It was just before the Warsaw ghetto that it was in April sometime that I remember that two partisans -- a partisan is a person who's a guerrilla warrior.
No more schoo l. In Ghetto starts school ina room  in a street the teacher take a few children and start teaching.
The ghetto to which they press around 150 000 -- 160 000 Jews  was occupied before probably by 10 000 -- 15 000 people and that was the worst slums by l ooting.
SB: Tell me a little more about going to the ghetto.
But in the ghetto  in Czestochowa  you said that there we re deportations.
But there were about over 20 people which went to Lobartov...because they were  the thought was because the Germans made propaganda in the beginni ng that they gonna be just resettled to another ghetto  and I didn't trust them.
That's the story how we got out from the  the two girls  myself and Alla  from the ghetto.
But peop -- that -- you know  there wa -- it was known that there was an uprising in the ghetto.
And I remember that we were told that we have to move to the ghetto  probably we were given a time  and we were taken to the ghetto.
And then we were being marched down the streets where there was the small ghetto.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 19 >> Bill Benson: Back home to your apartment.
That means  I stopped working at [Angelo ] before the ghetto  be two weeks.
But we had no money so we ended up living in one room in the Jewish ghetto.
In the interim  I made another foray to the Warsaw Ghetto with another guard to obtain some things fr om my uncle  some clothes he gave me.
Can you tell us when you were taken away from the nunk the Užhorod  the ghetto?
Somebody picked it up and ran to the ghetto in Siau liai.
And a German officer or somebody from the army or the ghetto  he looked at.
And Professor Belodski lost his mind in ghetto  and they put him in a little home  locked him up  and left him.
And how often did you go in and out of the ghetto?
I went back to Budapest where that time even so that Hitler was far and advancing all over; it was still not the ghetto.
You probably know the landmark of the Ghetto was everybody carried a little canteen to work because we got our soup in it.
When I met Vilik  Captain Bagles son  who was my very close friend in ghetto  I met -- met him in New York  my first question was Vilik  what happened to your fathers walking stick?
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 18 >> Sam Ponczak: Yeah.
Whereas the initial order  the year before  to go to the ghetto  that was from the Germans?
You had to wear the Jewish -- the Star of David?
Im sure there were Jews living around  but it was -- a-as far as I ca -- I remember  when Id visit a friend  it was pretty far away  it was -- because this -- the school that I went to was a Jewish school.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/MIRIAM GERSHWIN page 17 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: working places because there wasn't so much demand.
Your father was allowed still to go in and out of the ghetto.
I dont remem -- then  we went with her to that place where my son was working because my father was working in the ghetto.
And I walked out and I met the O.D. man and this was the last time -- might have been maybe a month or a few weeks before the liquidation of the ghetto  and Im really happy I had the chance to go there to see my parents.
And then  when the people went to the ghetto  most of the people didnt believe that it will be for long.
He would take them on freight cars that are trav eling between Grodno and Wilno and he would let them if they arrived safely  hoping that they wo uld arrive safely  he would bring them into the gates of the ghetto.
I think they took us away in the morning from the ghetto to the railroad station.
And many times in the ghetto  the Germans used to come in the middle of the night and they used to take out the people just for no reason and we never saw them again.
And what sort of work were you doing in this ghetto?
Do you remember any other actions or brut ality that happened while you were living in the ghetto?
So I -- yeah  I believe in July or in August  they formed the ghetto  and we were in ghetto in Minsk.
The majo rity of the German Jews especially  not so much the Czechs  came with the idea  or at least if they didnt come with it  it started within the ghetto  ﬁWe will teach them how to do things here  and we will change things in the ghetto.
Knowing what the ghetto is because I had a little bit of experience before  so I said I am not going to go in the ghetto.
I mean  its not what your looks was  they was just shouting and shooting  going crazy  so I dont know whether she was shot in the ghetto  what happened to her  I dont know.
After th then lets go back to that part where youre talking about the Jews are in the ghetto  which is the south side of Chicago equivalent  and what happened after that?
And he had the permission and so he went the ne xt morning to that small ghetto.
So everything that had any value of any was taken out of the ghetto.
And she reads in Yiddish  you know  about the [indecipherable] ghetto and my son writes in English.
We walked and they take us to this...and there were some big  big apartment houses in ghetto on that street  and they walk us to those machines that I will never forget.
Except the head of the ghetto threw my mother out and my sister because he knew that my mother had some gold pieces which she had saved to pay the gentlemen who smuggled me.
I said  the Polish uprising in Warsaw   when did it come?
So you were taken away to the ghetto w ithin a few weeks of them coming into your town.
The main road to Warsaw through Lodz was cut through the Ghetto.
And right after the  right during the war  when the ghetto was finished and we ran away from the ghetto  my mother left a lot of things with that lady.
Marched into the ghetto and...uh...met my brother and...uh...met my brother there and my mother was still alive.
Five thousand Jews from the ghetto went day in  day out  24 hours an day there  and there was a terrible  terrible situation for the people.
At that time in 1943  there was the uprising in the ghetto  uprising already.
No  I know that  but while you were in the ghetto did you  were you aware of the Judenrat  did you... Sure.
I was  as I said  prepared to go for the woods but not for the farm  but since I got such a a word from Pnina so it was nothing doing  so I had to escape from the ghetto.
So you had no Gentile friends  or [indecipherable] Well  well  in my case  there were on the -- to the best of my memory  I lived on a dead end -- you know  it would help us  you have that map  itll be a great help if we could kind of -- This is the ghetto  so -- No  this is the -- this is Lodz.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 7 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: of other atrocities but that was one of the most horri- ble scenes that I've ever scene even through--through- out the--the Holocaust.
45 You were saying that it was better to work inside the ghetto?
And then they told us we were going to a main ghetto  a main ghetto  and that wa s Auschwitz and then we took like four days and four nights without water  wit hout bathroom facilities  without anything  everyone sitting on top of each other  no room  everybody was scrunched together  there was no room to stand up eve n  they put in so many of us.
No work.ﬂ It took an hour  and the police the Jewish ghetto police came into the cour tyard and took her away.
And so 10 sometimes I took her around the ghetto  and I show her that is the Jews.
In August 1942  the Germans rounded up Jews at night  they would come at night  surround the areas that were predominantly Jewish.
There were Lithuanian fire br igades who came close to the close to the uh ghetto fence  but they came just to safeguard th at the fire shouldn't come over to the other side of the of the fence.
A book...you can imagine...where did we have this pl ace to to to keep them in the ghetto or to or to store them  but this is what he wa s very excited about that he should...it was one of the outstanding monumental work...the history of the mode rn Hebrew literature and uh 75he was the head of the of the cultural department and he...you know  we had also from the children  you see  we tried to keep for them the holidays children should know.
While we meaning my--my parents and two more brothers  myself slept in one room in the other room.
big ghetto or were already separated and had gone on to Treblinka and I kn ow that my neighbors  young people  a boy and a girl  my age  went with their grandparen ts  in a wheelchair  so obviously I knew what happened.
And was your father in around Warsaw   or had he come back?
So the the where you lived  was it mainly a Jewish neighborhood?
So she took a basket  she took some straw  and she took one chicken with us to the ghetto.
So they gave him...they hit him on the head  and he fell and fainted and gently we run back from the other side of the ghetto and we took him to a closed home ...uh... on the othe r side  and there he stayed for 2 days because he was beaten all terribly beaten and blood  and it was a terrible situation and to...to...to the great...to the great mourning of 10 000 victims  we had thought that Dr. Elkes got from it should not...should not come up on his feet again and to go on the leadership.
And in the beginning in the ghetto  families were still allowed to be together which was a good thing and didn't last all too long because every few w eeks there would be a selection -- oh  yeah.
Every morning w you had to Interview with Noah Roitman April 8  1999 28come in the front of the ghetto  and from the ghetto they took the people to work.
Now  at that point  who was still living with you before you left the ghetto?
>> Bill Benson: When you had a neighbor or a classmate or a colleague who was deported  did you have any idea where they were being sent?
In fact   there was some ghetto  it was not as large a ghetto.
Uh after the war broke out and we uh were put into the uh the ghetto  uh sometime uh in 1940 we were uh put into the ghetto in uh Radom uh where they would take a whole section and uh keep all the Jews  collect all the Jews uh from the neighboring uh towns and villages.
I know nothing really good or bad about the ghetto police.
It 103means that you take off my head  and in this moment comes into the room   escorted by the commander of the ghetto  th e German commander of the ghetto  not not a plain sentry.
Her husband was a chief of police in the ghetto where I was  not in the ghetto  in the camp  in the camp.
One of the questions was when you were living in the ghetto  was that in Chadbush?
>> Bill Benson: That included some people that were from your family a nd from the ghetto tha t you were in.
Thats Warsaw  that April 43 date is so fundamentally Wa rsaw that he had to have been in the Warsaw ghetto.
But the fact that we were incorporated into Germany must have been a factor  that we were living to the ghetto only at the end of 42  and perhaps even ni -- perhaps -- perhaps not in 42  but in 43.
The ultimate plan was either to make contact to stay in Warsaw proper on the Aryan side  or if not  go back to the Warsaw ghetto which was still big and maybe look up her uncle who lived there.
one they sent back to the ghetto  the other one they shot out.
Wilno Ghetto was not tremendous and not necessarily dressed up  and not necessarily friendly and not necessarily -- just different needs and when you would go on the Wilno streets outside the Ghetto  those were lovely streets  lovely people.
Mordecai Anielewicz  the leader of the uprising in the Warsaw Ghetto  who perished in 1943  was our guest during the first and second Passover seder in 1941.
SB: And so you went into the big ghetto and then where did you go?
And Mrs. Swaveka Karlingska is one of the  was one of the  I don't know if she s till is there  people that ran the museum  and she told us that the people from ghetto.
So whatever we had left over from the trading  she would get teachers in the community  in the ghetto  to teach the three of us a nd a couple of others.
So therefore I had to take a -- I lived up here  I had to board a trolley car and tr-travel I would say about 20 minutes on a trolley car to Ribna  which w ould be -- this is Balskirinik  its somewhere right before Balskirinik  because it was duri ng the war in the ghetto boundary.
Now  when I read -- I read a book  right  from the koba -- Kovno ghetto  it comes back.
The Jewish hospital was there  and a lot of poor Jews lived around this section and one night the SS  with the help of the Ukrainian police and the Lithuanians  they came in and took out all the Jews from there and they drove them to a place  Ponary [in the] outskirts of Vilno there and they shot them all there.
Do you know when they were sent to the ghetto in Ch?
Actually  I just want to go back a little bit before you describe the Ghetto.
But I ma de up my mind that I'm not going to change my mind and I came to the entr ance of the ghetto.
>> Susan Taube: In the summer of 1943 they took young people to dig peat moss  about ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 40-kilometer s outside the Riga ghetto.
Especial ly they have people  the people  you suffered more than the local  the people who got settled into ghetto like from Germany  from Prague  from Vienna.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 23 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: JL: No.
The exhibit is opening the 19th and 20th  I believe  or the 20th and 21st of November  a nd we're going to be in volved in making sure that the survivors of the ghetto get to the museum and the busses take them  and then have a hospitality suite that we're going to have for them.
I said  ﬁWell  Hitler didnt kill me   to heck with them.ﬂ Were you aware  in the ghetto  of any people who were sort of in an underground group of resistance?
They were demolishing houses around the ghetto because the Germans want to build a no-mans-land around the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/TED PAIS page 34 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: there  the Udaendulster.
In the ghetto  Leon worked for the postal service  delivering letters  milk and ration cards.
And he sort of knew what was going on and meanwhile the Jews in the little ghetto used to make hand grenades.
So they were in a position to trade their well established comfortable homes for a peasant's home in the newly formed ghetto.
Then we wanted to know...certain family when they started to write  they wanted to know about their members...there we re certain families that part of them were in the Vilna ghetto and part of them were in the Kovno ghetto.
Oh  yes  there was always a black market in the ghetto  yes.
Anthony: So you were able to stay in the ghetto because you were pretending to be a brother of–Did your brother  did he remain?
I say it is one hour in city Kolke the time to come to the ghetto.
The situation that made my family rethink thei r status outside of the ghetto came from neighbors we had known for years before the war that said the situation is getting real bad.
These were Lithua nians who had...who came in just to to to to steal and to take away what the Jews have left  so you see this was also...and this but to to learn the moment of danger to death was always there and uh she has done it and  of course  I took her some firewood from the house  from another house and be...behind the firewood I put the the drawings of Esther and we safe came back to the to the ghetto.
No  no  my -- my -- everybody understood that ther e is no future in the ghetto and that they are going to kill us all.
At 41  it was really  really before the ghetto was set a fire it started to become real bad.
>> Gretchen Skidmore: So you and your mother are then in the Warsaw Ghetto.
The ghetto in order to go into the ghetto they ga ve us from eight in the morning till two in the afternoon.
So  after being there two days  we sneaked out of the Ghetto and continued our trip to the Russian side.
We have the Red Cross report  and my father (sic) was in a -- like a ghetto  a small ghetto  and I don't recall exactly where  but he was sick and he was old so he just probably passed away in there  don't have any real documentati on on him.
When did you st -- End of Tape One  Side A Beginning Tape One  Side B This is a continuation of a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Ann Green.
>> Bill Benson: And you would remain living in those circumstances  I think the Socola ghetto   for three years  1942 until the spring of 1945 when the Russians came.
But this incident I have to mention it  it was the same thing like in the ghetto.
Two days later  they said that all the people who remained in the ghetto  they have to march seven kilometers  which is approximately three miles in our measurements here.
And on the other side of the city  we saw tremendous smokes coming...uh...from the ghetto and everybo dy said that the ghetto is aflame.
Interview with Cesare Ugianskis February 1 8  2013 35 Well  they essentially ghetto  stay there  you know  and they kept on killing them bringing people there and then shooting them in the nine foo for Ninth Fort .
Those were the Jews from the Ghetto were brought in  dug out the graves and put some petroleum and burned it.
It's a little kiddie song that was sang in my ghetto and I brought it to the world.
So I came back from this camp and I started to work by the Germans.
They find maybe in the farm  it was  nu  maybe 30  40 people  and they take us in the ghetto  back in the same place where it was before  and they take us in...in the houses.
>> Bill Benson: Before you tell us about the ghetto  you were also  I think  at some point sent to work on a farm.
It wa s already in ghetto  5 and we never sit together.
But eventually  with time  the ghetto was instead of up  was  I would say  shortened  squeezed shorter and shorter and shorter.
Germans selected about 20 or 30  I don't know how many  young woman to take them to a farm far away from Ghetto to dig out vegetables that were ripe to pick up vegetables.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 26 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: and I remember going to the funeral.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BRIGITTE ALTMAN page 19 Interviewed (5-5-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: shift and then they were exempt from the curfew.
What he did is he looked around for possibilities  and one possibility was to join the ghetto police.
So  at that time we had alrea dy the third Jewish man in charge of the ghetto  two were killed already and he said oh that was Marion Barrow (?)
So we asked him he should pick out six from our guys and send us to the ghetto.
And how he broke his leg  they were rounding up some people in the ghetto.
So now I would like to tell  I have first been in the ghetto in resjur  then I was in the brick factory in mishkoltz  we were taken to Auschwitz  I was in the Birkenau lager  and the camp was named B3 which one was meant a camp of elimination.
So I and we before we had to go to the ghetto back  he came and he says  I want my two man.
But th-the the ghetto life right away I mean  we right away organized ourselves.
There was a mother who had a baby on her hand and three children on her...holding on on her because her husband was in the other ghetto.
I knew very well Warsaw  but since they separated small ghetto  a big ghetto and here you could go and here you can't go so I was really was very mixed up.
Somebody came and told me ﬁAron  tomorrow at six-thirty  seven oclock you come to this particular home.ﬂ And the house was inside the ghetto  but almost by the end next to the wires.
But later on  there was so many deportations that the ghetto shrunk.
They went away  they ran away that night from the ghetto.
>> Sylvia Rozines: This period I don't remember before but I remember being in the ghetto and I remember the barbed -wires  and soldiers standing all around guarding us so we couldn't escape on the Polish side.
And the ghetto was in the small town you were born a nd grew up in?
I made my own diagnosis because during in the ghetto my father and my sister had typhoid and I was attending.
The -- The ghetto revolt was Passover of ‚43 and the Polish revolt was September of ‚44.
So  I dont remember starving in the ghetto  lets put it this way.
So the Jewish community that was there -- you said it was a -- it was a lovely Jewish community  where were those people from and what kinds of traditions did they follow?
In Ghetto there was a large building which it  how should I call it -- they gathered everybody up there  and after they emptied out the Ghetto  they went from home to home  told everybody to go.
When  when they did the deportations and the evacuations in the factory and the houses  was there a particularly horrible atmosphere in the ghetto at these  at these times?
My brother was helping in the ghetto   working there  you know.
Because  you know  like I told you  some very intelligent men ask me about the Warshaw ghetto  and I told him  ﬁI would insult your in telligence if I tell you  because I read the same book that you can pick up off the shelf  and read it in there in the library.ﬂ Do you think that the publics perception of survivors has changed over the years  that the American public looks at survivors in a different way than they have?
When you were working the ghetto  you look out for somebody.
Perhaps -- from the villages were bro ught in and they were shoved into the ghetto including my fathers house.
If I want to see what is going on in the ghetto  I went in like a Polish farmer.
And Germans would say yes  you can throw it to ghetto.
There was a what they called an international ghetto  where the Swiss  the Swedes  the [indecipherable] and the Spanish had rented buildings  about 32 buildings.
But the big problem was after a few weeks  maybe  they decided to move back to their old neighborhood  the Jewish 8 neighborhood  where there were lots of vacant apartments since the Jews had been taken away.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/PNINA TORY page 28 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: and  and we sign.
I really wants to share that and admire these people that wanted to give you a little bread for you to eat and wanted to give a little type of other food also to take back to the ghetto for your family.
