Those that did the dirty work  from rounding up Jews and certainly those who did the killing  there was no indication of any touch of sympat hy for the victims.
The Jewish hospital was there  and a lot of poor Jews lived around this section and one night the SS  with the help of the Ukrainian police and the Lithuanians  they came in and took out all the Jews from there and they drove them to a place  Ponary [in the] outskirts of Vilno there and they shot them all there.
So the Lithuanian police went through the apartments and together with the Jewish police  and asked everybody to go out to the ghetto  to people in the front of the -- of the gate  and then they went to search every apartment if somebody was left there.
I am with the police  with the fire department  with tran -- trans -- the transit  and ever -- and a -- we have meetings  and I -- and during the day I am there with the police  I arrange the security  because with the parking and everything.
Interview with Al Jaffee May 21  2016 94 I still think that there is Well  I just cant picture being with a large armed Jewish group  out to have sport by killing Gypsies  or some other unfavored black people  you know.
So one day  I I became friendly also with the chief of police  and I told him I I say  Im involved in in this type of activities where sometimes I have to go from one sector now that Berlin is divided four sector; the French  the British  the Russian  and the and the American.
One is...  I know I remember it  like a Sonderfuhrer it's called in English...uh...in German  and the other's like a [police commisarov ] .
You couldn't tell them about Aktions and killings and killing centers.
Germany lost  but Germany still was killing in the last minute.
I -- I dont know what he was trying to do  but they were screaming  and they called the police  and next day I came to see how they were doing  you know  and th-thats where is started.
So it was reall y hard getting used to the  to the fire engines and the ambulances  the police cars.
Either they beat somebody  so me German and they runaway and the police knew who was he  came home.
They used to be caught by the police  and the police arrested them  and we couldnt see this a German sol German people to hold our own people  so we start to demonstrating  we didnt want to eat that time  you know  we took the food out the middle of the camp  and we took the there was a kitchen there  I mean  there was a lot of food  and and we spilled the food on the street over there  and we showed the camp commander he was an American that we not gonna tolerate something like this.
So he again looked at the card  he looked at this boy and there was a moment of silen ce and and and really I felt...I felt...I mean this was the moment where we...a decision had to be made about the life of a human being and then he said to me  sir  could you guarantee that this is a mistake of the German police  and I said by all means.
Then \ police court  organization of street officers  registration  administrative information  delegated to welfare  reports and statistics.\
01:45:01 And then the militiza came  the...the...the communist militia  the...the equivalent of our police and found him and brought him home.
On the German side  they kept killing with bullets and they brought the dogs 40 in.
And I was arrested by two Ukrainian policeman  and -- who were rather polite  and -- and he told me that Im being suspected of being Jewish  and Im taken to the Brody commis -- Commissariat of Police.
So I said to her I knew that he she has they were villagers  but they were police  that shes not gonna send me a policeman thatll take me to the Germans.
His name is Mr. Buchwalt  Ephraim Buchwalt  and he and me had for a years time  a correspondence  after the article that it appeared in the newspaper in New York  saying the Holocaust is killing the American Jews.
I knew the Germans were were were killing the Jews  but I didn't know what they'd do...they have camps like this to...you know  I didn't.
>> Henry Greenbaum: After we were separated in a place called Treblinka  killing center.
They couldn't go anywhere without a Laisser-passer permit from the police.
He is under police surveillance  and you are not allowed to see him  and you are not allowed to mention it  but I cannot begrudge.
And then they -- he had to go every month to the police.
When the officer told me that -- when my friend told me  and he was the captain of the police station from the town  from the city  when he told me that  nobody wanted to believe it.
But -- and there were no gendarmes inside  just the ghetto police.
And then in...uh...in 1943  they took the...they arrested all the police and the Army.
But  whatever we had  we were going and bringing it in to the police.
At that time everybody in ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 14 Austria had to register with the local police  no matter where you lived.
I mean  it was just as cruel as the Polish police or anybody else.
He made them cover them up  and he said  ﬁI had enough killing today.
But there was a as I started school  until the first deportation took place from town  and that was in 1941 for certain people who were claimed to be communists were at night -- police came at night  took these people away  and they were never seen since -- never came back.
Birkenau was designed and built for the sole purpose of serving as a giant killing machine to dispose of that part of European Jewry that had not been devoured by the extermination centers in Eastern Poland.
But we the people  even after this morning  I was reading the newspaper  all this killing all over the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 world  again and again.
We saw the killing  we saw the machine guns  we saw everything.
However  the eastern pa rt is called general government  and there is -- the Polish rule prevails   the Polish police  national police is still in charge in their navy blue uniforms.
When the resistance took over and became the police force  then we had several other guys that enlisted as police.
I thought of them -- I -- I knew personally Kopelman  who was the head of the police  and he was a very decent person.
They told me  for example  how babies' heads were smashed against walls  the wanton killings that occurred for absolutely no reason at all  just for the sake of killing or for the slightest trivial thing that was done wrong.
So he was -- and ironically that was done -- I think it was the Jewish police that -- cause they didnt know  they were just told to s -- you know  we need some workers  you know  for a few hours and so he ended up in the camp.
And so we went to Neshoba County and the FBI had uncovered a number of other police-brutality cases that  where local officials  the sheriff a nd local police had acted illegally when beating blacks  primarily.
Anthony: So the Jewish police took him away and you never saw him again?
They were looking for the younger son of our hostess  who used to -- his job 23 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD was killing pigs for a living.
Inside there was the Jewish police  so whatever...if...whenever some top official of the Gestapo or of the Wermacht or the stock commissar  entered the ghetto immediately th ey signal by phone to us.
So I got on my bicycle  and went to the other side of the river  and got to the police department  wher e people knew me through my brother-inlaw.
I went to Cologne no to Lyon (excuse me) and I mobilize public opinion   Lyon was the City in France but Barbie was not known for the killing of Jewish children sent to Auschwitz  he was known because he had killed Jean Mouli n  the Chief of the resistance in France  there was a group of the friends of Jean Moulin  so I started saying we have to do something against this decision because we cannot tolerate that this man can be morally acquitted by the German prosecutor; and I h ad resistant fighters  young Jews  and we went to Munich  we had collected new documents  there was somebody in Lyon a lawyer whom we met and we said you have to help us  we have to bring the proof to the German prosecutor that Barbie has known  if not no thing can be done against him  yes he said I remember one day Icame to see as a Jewish leader  came to see Barbie  and said the Jews will be executed please perhaps you can put them to be sent to East  as a change they can survive and Barbie replied execut ing on the spot os all the same anyway death  it is proof that sending children of Izieux to Auschwitz meant killed but not only this arguments were needed for the German prosecutor  there were demonstrations of resistant fighters  and the youth Mme.
They didn't have a killing facility in this place  so they sent the truck to collect the sick and take them to where there was a killing facility  which was Ravensbruck.
and I was -- thats one thing my parents told me  never to fight with BDM  which were the girls  or the Hitler youth  because if you were one person they would gang up on you  and certainly the police would come  and y -- I would have put my parents into harms way  too.
So Before we get there  when you said the Polish police -- No it was the Polish army.
But in Chicago  around city hall  even if it only lasted for two minutes  and the amount of money that it cost the city to allow that to happen  between the police  extra time  and extra vigilance that it -- they needed  was ext -- was a tremendous amount.
And between the husky big people without the Star of David  I would never had a opportunity to get there because as groups of people got their  their fulfillment  new groups of people arrived to wait for the police.
And they we these were SS  rather than another branch  or not not the police  or Wehrmacht   or anything like that?
I tell you  first the -- I dont know if I told you that  that the lawyer that we had  her father was chief of police -- Mm-mm. --
And he was inside the police station  was standing in the corner  the people were going around their business there  you know  nobody was paying any attention to him as far as I could see.
I mean  we heard from the Jewish inmates who were in the police  Jewish police  that we will go to Auschwitz.
He was too to German police  he would be equally insec incriminated  cause he also lived in the same attic with me .
But  by having Jewish police behave the way they behaved  Father escaped having Germans at the gate.
When there was suppear -- supposed to be the judgment of Doust  willful killing  I was surprised.
Here on this side having having Belarusian police  and some of some German police  etcetera So from this side.
I remember once I was up in the Borzsony mo untains in Hungary in a self-d efense camp for a week and somebody betrayed us to the police and the police surrounded us an d there was a creek  not deeper  I don't think it was deeper than maybe twenty inches  and guess w ho is the one who escaped from the creek in order to do something  not to save his own skin  but he was immediately telephoning and all this and that and eventua lly we were released.
He he was he represented the authorities  more directly authorities of the of the NKVD  which was the Soviet secret police.
Okay  so there were a number of cases where we were -- were sort of -- anti-Semites reported us to the police and say here are some Je ws that are not wearing the yellow patches  and 17 were summoned to the police and we showed our passes.
And these six people recruited the Jewish police  and the 150 people that come th -- came there before  and did the whol e job of deporting close to 100 000 people  just with six of them.
SB: Do you--do you every remember having a run in with any uh of the Jewish police  the ghetto police or did they ever help you?
Today if I would spank my daughter  she -- she probably would call police.
And that time we knew that while there -- some number of Jews were killed  well th -- lets hope it -- maybe theyll stop the killing.
I had a police hat only when I was to go there.
As a rule the ghetto police were not terrible but we really didn't know whom we could trust.
Later when they're arrested and they are brought into the police station and one of them has got a piece of lead pipe in his pocket  and one of them has got a hammer in his pocket  and anything that could be used as a weapon  okay.
And did you ever have any encounters with the Danish police?
And...uh...this work intensified and I established relations with the various police forces  with the Hungarian Nazi Party  and I was looking for support  and it didn't matter where it came from.
So  when we came back to Holland  the head of the police in my hometown say that all the people from Poland had to go back to Poland.
It was after the war and I was already a little bit older  then we really started realizing what was happening  and about killing the Jews and about how we actually struggled on what they did to us and thats why we were persecuted running from place to place  and we just couldnt wait to be able to come to this country.
In September 1942 the ghetto was liquidated and its inhabitants  including members of David's family  were deported to the Treblinka killing center.
And as I was arguing with the with that policeman  the chief of police came and said  whats going on here?
Mostly  these police  \ Jewish police \  were there to protect the Jews.
Was it the German SS  or was it the Hungarian police that The Hungarian police.
You asked me about early memories and going back  backtracking  probably one of the earliest ones  again looking out from our windows  where the first of many demonstrations  thousands and thousands of people were marching every first of May. And just marching with banners and on both sides  Czech police with nightsticks  escort  but it was just amazing how many people were  I don't know how to phrase it  let's say loyal to that cause  how many people identified with that cause and every year people in clean clothes and spruced up and people on bicycles and all the bicycles had red paper ribbons in the wheels and the spokes and red banners and bands and marching bands.
The first day of May had to be the end of April is the first day May. Before in April  the Ge rmans out it out big signs   everybody whos alive  whos in the woods  whos in the fields shall come back to the city -- no more killing.
When we first came to the 9th Fort  so that the S.S. and the German police guards were there look in the book he says.
And my father wa s playing bridge  there used to be evening bridge with the priest  and the police  the commandant of local police  Mr. Polovich  and he -- the pharmacist  that was a bridge party.
She got off the train and as soon as you got off the train  you know  most concentration camps were killing centers.
>> Bill Benson: Otherwise the police came to the ir home to get them.
But the police  German police  would take away everythi ng from them and beat them when they were coming back.
Over there  went down  didn't see any Germans around  but Polish police.
All those things I try to -- to leave out  because the children dont have to be exposed to this graphic thing -- they see enough graphic killing in a movie.
When they came in...the police came in...there was some Jewish police came with them.
And we hadnt gotten out  and he called the police and said we were refugees without permit.
But somehow -- I don't know if this man or other some  they denounce them to the German police.
So police had all  where ever you lived  that district had a police department  and in there you had to regi ster so they knew all the people who lived in their district because they were a ll registered.
But -- but an interview with her and you know  there is all these people who -- who have the condition of man at heart and who work to improve the world  wherever it is  when -- whatever it is  so I dont know its balance  but really the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0018 142 inhumanity is just -- its rampant  its everyw here  its in our local police  its in the army  its everywhere.
The troops were chasing the Germans or the inmates had captured the Germ ans and were busy beating them or killing them  and you know people were dying all ar ound.
You could walk out  yes  because between shooting and killing so many people there was no more ghetto.
And I remember the...the mens they took on the trucks and children and woman  they...a lot of police and they...they go with...by themselves on foots they walk.
The ghetto police us to keep order in the ghetto but otherwise only special actions took place  the Germans didn't free from the ghetto that much inside.
While I  even to this day say I think we did the right thing in dropping it  but from the standpoint of civilians being killed who really were not involved  and we were killing civilians too  werent we  with that bomb?
And that must have been  I would say  the day – the beginning of May. And they set up machine guns  and they killing us out – start killing .
He was a few years somewhat younger than my father a nd his father  Dr. Kulz's father  had also himself been a lawyer  but more importantly  he had been Minister of the Interior in one of the pre-Hitler governments of the Weimar Republic and in Germany  like I think in many European countries  the police is within th e Interior Ministry sort of an agency  I mean like somewhat comparable to the FBI here   which is in the Justice Department.
That's one thing it was  there was every sign of it  you know  like there was military establishment  so we put  we put in our rooms and bunk beds you know and uh so you start up police department an employment office  everything was kind of temporarily  and a hospital  of course was a hospital there because it was a military establishment previous to when we arrived.
I suspect some Jewish agency from Palestine that did that and the car took me from Aleppo to the Palestine border  stopped there  went to the police station  they asked me a few questions  then the car took me to Haifa  where a friend of mine was waiting for me  Mr. Horowitz  and... What do you think about the responsibility of the organizers of this voyage  the people who really organized the trip?
I guess I hadnt changed really  either  because I wasnt really in a killing camp.
And we found this Jewish police and the government [indecipherable] and some people were there.
I think its very important  because now here in America  you hear so much violence  you hear so many young people killing one another.
So  from that time  I had to every week to the police and melk myself  because I was in str -- in -- anoth -- Dutch cit -- CE: Foreigner.
And I started again  and  and after three  four days being in bad areas where I had to come back with almost nothing to eat  I lined to work for the Third Police Brigade in the center of the most luxury area in  in Kovno.
They killed healthy people  I don't think that they had any remorse in killing those people.
Portugal is a neutral country.ﬂ So I said  \ Okay.ﬂ I left and I joined the...at the time was in Haifa talking to some other friends in there  I joined the PPRD  the Palestine Police Railroad Division.
They took us to the police station at the entrance to the ghetto  an d inside the ghetto to some kind of  I remember  big room and they started to ask us for documents and what we are doing.
Third thing that happened in camp  almost within days that we arrived  remember  this is a concentration camp  it's a labor camp  it is not a killing camp.
This was -- and I never had the feeling of -- jus -- we went to the shops  was -- was forbidde n in any ca -- and so at first  when we came there  the police came and told us what happened to us when we are violent.
This the Fascist head police once a day  head of the family  so we know that you are in the to wn.
And with their help and their contacts with the border police and so on  they just looked the other way.
But this time he showed up with a police officer and two Iron Guard armed with rifles and bayonets.
It was the Jewish police to take care and sometimes they make -- they took the peoples go out from the ghetto  you know  with the Germans to work.
But that and thats when they took not only us  then they went there the police milit military police walked through that train.
01:15:36 Well  also during that time  as I had mentioned to you before  during the night many times the  the SS2 or the police not the Dutch police but the German patrol  police or whatever their designation was came to various homes  looked for Jews  wanted to see their ID papers  wanted to see whether they had special permits to stay away from being sent for relocation in the east  and these special stamps were sometimes that you had a you did quote  unquote  \ a very important work\  or that you had the possibility of getting a visa to get out of Holland via Portugal or that maybe you had instead of four Jewish grandparents you had only three Jewish grandparents.
The Au strian police was like -- was Hitler supporters  theres no question about it.
And its obvious that it was difficult for her to talk about something as as hag ghastly as that  you know  where where you know  mass killing was was carried out.
Uh to emphasize in a very democratic way which means that that uh and this was the shock we had that he had actually succeeded in killing democracy in Germany with a means of democracy.
Because  I have a book about it  you know  and -- and thats where -- thats where they -- they claim that most experimental killing started in Lithuania.
She turned the world upside down through police  Gendarmes  the International Red Cross  the Quakers  anyone who would listen  she would try to find out whatever happened to him.
The it wasnt allowed to stop inside the ghetto  but it went from one gate to the other  and I would jump off  see Zula   and then jump back on the on this on the streetcar  which was under the police guard.
Many people...some of them which were stronger were running toward the police station to pick up rifles when the German...uh...picked up rifles and they were shooting in the air.
They were using often primitive implements to kill people  not to speak of the fact that people were starving  exposed to the elements and just hanging  killing with knives  throwing people in the river next door.
Because I see it  whether it's in Israel  whether it's all over  you see  there are always people who are ve ry self-centered and they want ju st what they want and they do whatever is necessary in order to get what they want without thinking about other people  hurting other people or harming or killing other people.
I wanted to go to the dentist  you know  but somehow the police  they said to my father  don't go in the ghetto because there is going to be a .
So  they induced a fever in me and I'm always asked  how do you do that and they took some French bread and made balls out of it  like meatballs and soaked them in vinegar and I had to swallow about eight or nine of these vinegar soaked bread balls and sure enough within a half an hour or forty-five minutes  I was in bed with a high fever and when the police came  they took my temperature and they verified and certified that yes  he is not fit to be transported.
I was subsequently told  of course I can't prove it  that the police had to return to the house later to keep the parents from beating so severely.
Inste ad of killing us  now we were surprised they didn't kill us.
But  as soon as the SS and Gestapo police 9 came  those things were strictly enforced.
And I remember  was a Yom Kipper day  I was still home  it was in the beginning of September  I don't know exactly what date  and we went with my husband and we stay in line at the police  there were many Jew there  going from the Synagogue to sta y in line for the police and the police on Yom Kipper day.
And one time when she went and then came back she got a letter that you have to come to th e police station  that you were carrying contraband.
Remember  I was having contacts with the Burgermeisters 17 and the chiefs of police and the health officials and so on and so forth.
She said if there's a police or anything  they might hear the name and they might come and take us away.
Not prisoners nobody  nobody dared to  to fight with the German because they were killing.
And then the women started to beg and to pray  say  ﬁWe were at the police  please allow us to go home.
ﬂ Sure enough when I got home the lady told me tomorrow report to the police station  take all of your stuff along.
So I have a friend who got a job in Washington  a psychologist working for the police depa rtment  and sh-shes my best friend actually  and she said to me  Ill find you a job.
I thought if it's a German place  the Polish police doesn't have any access.
And that meant that th e killing of large numbers of people without a war would not be a Crime Against Humanity  w ould not be within the jurisdiction of the Court.
Then he came home to get married  and the first wife was very -- after -- she was so beautiful  that is what I heard  that when he got married they had to have police on the roofs  because they were promising that they were going to steal the bride.
I remember once I was up in the Borz sony mountains in Hungary in a self-defense camp for a week and somebody betrayed us to the police and the police surrounded us and there was a creek  not deeper  I don't think it was deeper than maybe twenty inches  and guess who is the one who escaped from the creek in order to do something  not to save his own skin  but he was immediately telephoning and all this and that and eventually we were released.
I didn't know how the feeling of killing  but just listening to it I agreed to be the victim.
I might meet with the local mayor or police chief or whoever  \ Who's Daisy around here?\
Catholic Church  they were harboring him  he had already at this time to protest???????and he was amnestied by President Pompidoul at this time as you remember President Mitterand also had said in different cases no more trials against French Collaborators  of French High Officials in order not to embarrass the Civil Peace in France  that was the explanation given  not to divide the French population pro and anti Vichy and so we started at this time and ha was arrested and even though when arrested in the South part of France and the Police from Paris came over because the Police of the Cote DAzur did not want yo act  there was information going around   because the Police told us the KLARSFELD GANG will come and kidnap him  so the Police in Paris  so our fame  but the most important I think is the trial when my son defended most of the associated plaintiffs.
So we surrounded the police station one night and we disarmed the policemen.
When they returned home in 1944  police were sent to arrest the Garihs but agreed to say instead that the family was not home if the family would leave immediately.
It was nothing that was sure and was and  and was and was  I mean the whole country was like that  the whol e country was under  under police  I  I don't know what how you can  I can't even  how can I describe it?
But the...uh..timing was that the end of November the...uh...the German police rounded up all Polish citizens and it was very easy to distinguish a...uh..person because...uh...Germany was a dictatorship country and you had to register with the Police 3 regularly.
I had a terrible nervous digestion at that point  and even the police dog could not stand it.
So  from your point of view  there really wasn't that much activity between the Council and the police -- ------ the Council or the people.
Lets go back to lets go back to Fera Ferraba   is that where you were arrested by this NKVD oh no  by the police  for stealing.
And so she did that and then my father Anita Frank 9 [Date not labeled] Page 9 said many times that during the war  when in effect the  the police would come and when in effect they were told to pro duce papers that they couldnt produce  and when in effect these threats were made of transporting us  of  of interrogating us on the train because they notified my parents this might happen  that my father said she  he would just be in despair and my moth er just would support him and encourage him and say  ﬁNo  lets  lets go and see what we can do and lets contact Frompinksteron but be careful about it ﬂ and she just  she just  she just is the one who  who persevered.
He was in Poland  chief of police of the Jewish people.
A third one came to me and he immediately pulled out a police badge and said  \ Well  we are from the Secret Police and you are going to lead us to where your friend is.\
The police chief  Ramsey thought that all the police should go up  and the CIA.
This man made us first go to the border police and be searched.
I don't think -- I don't think it was in -- it wa s rumors was coming around that the Jewish police knew where children hiding places were   and they reported it to the Gestapo  and -- because to save their own skin that there  that's all they had.
So  its another phase of what the secret police did  you know  its it was the financial secret police  lets put it this way.
And then af ter awhile  he was a rather ambitious -- was in the army and then he joined the police force  and he made a name for himself  because he apprehended one of the most ferocious criminals at the time who had chopped up children and so.
But then the thing was that it was obvious that my father  we would all have to go because the police came to check on us  our tourist visas were finished so they said if you can find another place  another country that will have you we dont mind.
And  eh  we were in and out because there were certain days when he said  Look  I have a feeling that tonight the police will come.
If I would believe in God  would still be a believer  I must also believe in the same God who witnesses killing of little children.
When I got to Auschwitz  they had all kinds of ways of killing people.
When you mention th e men being rounded up and you and your mother and brother were rounded up  was this by the Hungaria n Police or Army or do you know?
She says  we dont call no fire department and police fo r somebody to go home .
I would have police bring that person to the office and I would interrogate them and write it down and then talk to them again and ask them if they were willing to sign whatever they told me.
But sometimes we had the chance to and -- and -- and there were reports finally  main ly from BBC  the Britis h radio  that the Nazis were killing  at that time it wa s said  hundreds of thousands of Jews  and that -- while it filled us with fear  it -- the number  hundreds of thousands   was so huge that it staggered our imagination.
Like this  put on a machine gun  and zzzzz  you know  killing e it wa for us  definitely they were not afraid to do it.
But we -- we would go work in the fields on Sunday  and we a -- they always used to light us up  you know  the police  but no-nothing ever happened.
So  yes  we did have police and we did have a Judenrot  but they were a part of the Jewish community of the Ghetto  which was not true in other Ghettos.
Post office  police office  a-and to me the police seemed to be chief of police seemed to be much bigger shot than my father.
It was high up in mountains...was nice  and  uh  it was a good feeling to be away from those killing places and from the chimney.
And police looked at it and said  ﬁGo on.ﬂ You know  there was no problem.
So they called the police and the police saw that we had legitimate passes  so the police said what do you want  they have legitimate passes because we got the passes.
Like I saying  they were killing already but somehow we made it through the things.
But these police was very instrumental in in many cases  in many after we were already established in the ghetto  we had a most of the people had already a regular I mean  some regular job  work  you know  the job was because nobody paid for the job.
On September 15th at one o'clock in the morning  the police came to our house and they told me to get dressed.
Some some of the police guys were bad  some of the neighbors were questionable  but there were an awful lot of good people.
And  the Jewish police  the Jewish administration we blamed for some errors they did.
What happened is the Germans  Latvians  Ukrainians with the assistance of the Jewish police  rounded all inhabitants of the ghetto into the marketplace.
They find something that was his father  grandfather  or the grandda -- somebody  you know  was comf -- arrive to the police -- Poland from the Germany.
And neither do the Swiss police or any other I know of.
So this is suspicious  how you survived  right  the Germans had the order of killing Jews whenever they found them and children too  so here I tell the real story  I must tell you  I never learn how to lie  I' m very bad at it  so how did it happen and I had to tell them the truth  that the German cam e into the hiding  dragged the parents  killed Edwarda Rorat 32 February 25  1996 Page 32 them and looked at me  thought I was pretty and they didn't kill me  so that sounds too naive and too ridiculous  they didn't believe it  right ?
Because killing children was something he could have ever imagined that anyone can do.
The police saying at first they had to have a working permit  and to get a working permit was hard.
And I had some encounters with the ghetto police when I was there briefly.
63 So it was the Jewish Judenrat  and the Jewish militia  the Jewish police  that implemented that order.
No  because the German give order po -- Polish policeman  take me to prisoner -- to police station how you call it?
The Polish police recognized me immediately and they approached me  and they said you are Jewish.
Also were in the leading place uh they also killed  as a matter of fact  they took one  La--Levine then  he was the chief of the police he forces uh.
And then they had to pay -- to payback  and they paid back by killing.
And here we still heard the news from -- and we heard the guns -- machine guns  that th eyre still killing people.
That today  in this age  this killing  this raping  these atrocities can happen  simply means that we -- weve concentrated in the wrong interests.
I think that this is a great achievement for Jews who the Nazis were going to exterminate that we somehow survived and became viable people in d ifferent parts of the world >> [Question Inaudible] >> JoAnna Wasserman: When the police came and you thought it was the end  what was it --what thought or idea or thing did you hold on to that kept you going?
What the French were trying  because the French were really collaborationists  what the French were trying to say is that they're not killing any Jews  French Jews.
And now we had to go back after two weeks to the city police.
And we came out...we came out like I say in...in the exit place was very close to this police main office.
And I become very friendly with the head of the police  the captain of the police  and he was Hungarian.
I have done it  so Mundig sent me another with the stamp Roman Catholic and this I got legitimate ID from the police which meant a lot.
The Jewish police was in the bigger ghettoes like Warsaw  Vilna   Veilostok   large  you know.
And anyone who ever has the opportunity to -- to hear that phrase  the Final Solution  need only put it into the internet browser and th -- you get 20 pages detailing the conference on Wannsee  which is outside of Berlin  a villa where the SS big shots  Eichmann  Himmler  Heydrich and Rosenberg and all these peopl e  15 in total  met  who were in charge of ultimately transporting and killing those Jews who we re still alive  and eliminating Jews from the face of Europe  which -- which -- which indeed happened.
You won't hear not one had word about the leadership and the Jewish police in −iauliai after a certain point because after a certain point them to cover other people that the Germans appointed  they brought them from the outside  it was different.
Within a half hour the police were up there knocking on the doo r  whos flying the Ge rman flag?
And the next morning gates were opening and closing and cars trucks moving out  and the whole regiment of the police left the compound and there was no one left behind  and I waited until night  following night  and I through the fence I find my way back to the city  to the ghetto area.
And he got the idea to take the most beautiful German girl what he has in his camp  give her some gifts  Polish sausage  vodka  diam onds or --------- whatever  or rings or gold or something  and he sent her to Auschwitz to open the door for him so that he can come over and talk with the Commandant Hess  who was Commandant of Auschwitz  who was famous for killing 4 000 to 5 000 people a day  and the woman came in  sh e became a girlfriend  she was so beautiful  that he couldn't resist it probably and give him a  but when Schindler came i n  he told him  \ I don't know what ------------------.\
And I I was afraid  because he could hurt killing me.
But the but it had there hadnt been that kind of killing before.
And he called the head of the police and told him to let the Dr. Weinberg out.
For about 10 minutes  he couldn't get to himself because killing children  that was more than he could take.
We took no-sleep tablets and it was just the routine type of interrogation that you sometimes see on police procedural detective stories - just hammering away again and again and again and by that time he was so exhausted as were we that he once more uh gave us the whole information.
And the people who were outside were in a better situation than the people who were inside the camp because we  inside the camp they have to live through the whole experience what is going in the camp  a nd the killing was going over there.
So you had to register in that...uh...that agency you I will call it  and...uh...you...and they had...uh...and after...after you register...after 3 or 4 days everybody registered  then they sent a policeman to your apartment and they took you down to the police station and they carried you away to a work camp that was in Germany.
You remember  accepted a job in the police  that was when he was a very young man  and he -- he was a weaver by profession.
She looked out and she saw that German 15 soldiers and Ukrainian police are coming in and this was her son.
We could not leave Jambul legally because there was some some difficulties with the police delegatura .
The group of German Schutzpolizei51 would stop a train or a bus  mostly train  get everybody out  fish out all 50 Priest (Polish) 51 Conventional police (German) 39 the young people  put them in trucks  take them to process  processing  transit  camp building.
The Hungarian state police -- if you go to the collaborators exhibit  you'll see them.
The wife of the com police commissioner of Amsterdam  who was his friend from Saint Moritz  who came to Wiesbaden   stayed with us a couple of days  and then took him to the train station  chattering loudly in Dutch.
The 74 Germans who beat me up told me that a wo man had denounced me  and eventually being a ghetto and being a very small area  it became known that she had given my name to the common law police.
And after a while in the same time after two or three weeks  they decided to evacuate the police headquarters because the front start to move in '40  in the spring of '44 very close.
What was what happened to you af ter you were at that police station?
But they came in...People start the killing for Russia because about half a million Jews escaped to Russia when the war started.
As it happens  we found ourselves not far from Hannover in a concentration camp  not a killing camp but concentration camp called Bergen -Belsen.
This I have forgetted that this this was a made a to go in in several office uh police office or ministerium or something to speak in the in the interest for the Jewish people  so they get this uh identi...identification.
That's a place they kept people two or three days without food  without water  without sanitary facilities  and then they took them on the cattle trains to t he killing -- killing place.
In the beginning we were sniping and we was killing them.
And then one dayI don't know how many days after thiswe went to a police station  my grandmother and I  and I believe she got a stay  you know  she didn't have to move immediately  because we stayed there.
I had nothing to do with the Councils  and the police  they were just standing at the post where the gates were to come in or out.
And next thing I knew  the I found out later he belonged to the police officers police captain or something and they were looking for me.
>> Julie Keefer: Janowska was later known -- began as a labor camp and turned into a killing camp.
That's why also at the time  a private army of Hitler  the Nazis was attacking Jews and some killing them in Wiesbaden.
The guy that was in charge of the camp  Mr. Ickes  was there for killing his wife and her boyfriend.
Otherwise we would have had to who got the police  agreed they would  he would take our passports.
And so many people was killing without probably maybe they do something against Nazis.
And next morning it was still pitch dark...I'd say probably about 4 o'clock in the morning  we were lined up in front of the barracks  again with the SS  with the police dogs with the guns everywhere.
And I came back in time to go -- opposite was the police station  a theater  and the director or the whatever you call it  of the railroad.
yes  cam -- I -- I grew up  because I meant -- I didnt mention this  that my father was responsible for the police department  armament only  yes  in Kelsa  and was a -- like a capital -- county town  county town.
102 -- now I am a member of the secret federal police  and -- the Norweg ian one.
And we didn't wait for them to attack us  we started to attack them  realiz ing the kind of forest and the kind of fighting that no longer were we dealing with the police  the local alone  but at this time we were dealing with a trained Army.
Well  she stopped when the French police  under the order of the German came to pick up my two brother.
In Auschwitz   so they are killing the Jews by gas.
With all the police guarding and everything  so he found for me a job and   a construction firm which was located in and employed slave workers from   Jews.
Take him to the police station  you know  and thats was somethi ng.
And so we filed a case in Federal court to require the police to start giving them pr otection and to stop this interfering and to sort of guarantee the safety of the blacks who would go to the movies.
You had the police of the city  you had the with the Nationals and it was part of it the munitions.
They had...but they had the police and what I remember is I fell asleep and I woke up and I saw fire  more fire yet.
There was a tendency -- I want to say as background  in the very beginning  when the Americans occupied Germany  they thought in the American way that all of the people living in Germany would be subject to German police and the German courts.
And we talked to each other and I told to Schmizne r  Shloma  who escaped with me from Sobibor  I tell him Shloma listen  tell them the story  I was sitting with another two boys from Sobibor in a farmer's place  the other two are not alive  I escape with a bullet  he has all our money  you mus t arrest him  you must get him too  because of killing.
This and that much I know .ﬂ He said  ﬁLet me try something.ﬂ And I said  ﬁIll pay you for it  if you find them.ﬂ He sent into the police department in Detroit  Michigan  a letter that said these and these people are looking f -- they are sur -- they survived the war and they are looking for their relatives in the States and within a week or two weeks  I received a -- a response  they are not in Detroit  Michigan  but they are in Washington.
A few weeks later the police called my mother in Berlin and asked her if she knew where her husband was.
So one night th ey came in  the police  and they give us ammunition  they going to attack us  going to be a pogrom  you have to defend yourself  we can do nothing about it.
When I arrived at the police station  he very briskly told me that I was under arrest.
A2: I-It wasnt just local police  it was way beyond that.
Course  one of the striking things about the Vietnam war is that a couple of our officers also went on a binge of killing Vietnamese citizens  the kind of thing that can happen when an ideologically motivated person is not constrained and is willing to kill people  certainly outside the law.
And if they would have found out it would have been killing hundreds of people.
And it  the whole thing accelerated to the point where th e last  when the only way she could be declared an exceptional perso n  as they were called  which means that youre not considered Jewish  was to take my grandmothe r down to the police statio n and that was a scene I remember: her taking my grandm other down and my grandmother had to  under oath  sign an affidavit that she is an  she was an illegitimate child because my grandmother was cleaning house for a lawyer  a Christian lawyer who was dead by that time  a bachelor.
And then we tried to be quite sure there was no German police  no German soldiers  no Danish uh corroborators  and we brought them down to the shore where the boat was waiting.
And by morning everything had to be gone because the police would come or the detectives would come and snoop.
And it was devastating  but we first realized that by not letting us join this police force my father had saved our lives at that particular time.
And after the war  we found out he got special honors for killing Germans.
Though they went with regular cars  not like with cattle cars  but with police and whatever  soldiers  Hungarian soldiers.
He beat them so up  you know  that eventually police came in and arrested him.
They took me - the barrack was very close to where we were arriving  the police barrack.
People read  they should know the killing  whats his name heard a lot of our stories.
First they started manually killing one by one then they developed these incredibly sophisticated ways of burning them and gassing them and burning them and a ll that  and by the time it came to Hungary what they starte d in 1939 what they started in Poland  let's say  ended up in Hungary as a push button system an d that's how they were able to desecrate the Hungarian Jewish population in a matter of three we eks I believe.
It's come a lot of police and they will kill what they two people...the two Jewish people what they're going in forest.
And the genera l told him  ﬁLook  we are killing people in a war  but we are not killing people who -- who -- who were not fighting.
So now we had to clean out the Polish police which were collaborators.
Bedbugs  lice on the beds  killing at night was an activity  you know to s-swipe them  do away with them.
In times of a man who was in charge of political police  poli -- poli -- by the name of Motcha  and he was anti-Semitic.
They had to register I think with the police but also with the Germans  but the Jewish Council.
We just saw them take off these dead people  and we were still to stand in line there because the police...I mean the SS at this point already was there with their police dogs and we were standing there because anybody dared to move  they just released the dog who teared people apart.
The first thing was to identify the Jews  although they ar -- physically identify  and physically and visibly identify  because they had at the police records they had all the Jews  because at the time you had to give your religion -- I dont know for whatever purpose  but to -- at the police station your registration was your religion known.
Most of the actions the Jewish police were involved with it.
And when the border police came in  I dropped it under the table  I didnt want to be found with that.
As he walks away from killing the je little Jewish boy  he is whistling an operatic t une.
But we heard about Poland  that whats going on there  that they were massacring and and and killing  and the Jewish people.
Then when they start to come in  you know  the people from Germany  they pass by our town and they told us  but still we couldn't believe  till they came to us and it start  the killing.
The people that I saw on the streets when I walked  were -- were the people who were killing and stealing and robbing and -- and -- and committing crim es  including the people who gradually USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0076 12came to the forefront in a political position.
So I had -- it had a num ber  a nu -- number  if you go down there  you see the police.
That night we came home and our father says  ﬁI had a call– I was visited by the police.
So there I was with a hospital on my hands and I said  \ Well  you've just got to wait a moment and call up the police chief.
Did your parents know any of what you were going to be doing  or or Especially when I was coming you know  there was a police hour in Warsaw   eight oclock.
The Germans might have destroyed the faculty by killing them  by deporting them  but they did not destroy the records.
These were -- they had nearly enough military police or regular organization to go around to handle everything we had run across  so they conferred these A.A. battalions primarily to security police and had their helmets painted accordingly.
Then when we went to work  in that place  for the SS men  one day I heard that when we go back  there is going to be massive killing of all the ghetto people.
That was sort of the first really serious killing experience that  that I had.
Explain explain that fee ling; as a young boy in an underground religious community and this sense of HaShem that is there for you and and yet  everything seems so out of control and constant police interrogations and fear of the police  in Kavidar?
So we went with the coffee to a police department in the American sector and asked him to register us in American sector  which he did for the coffee.
The local police came by  there were only one or two policemen in the whole town  and they came by and took us to the school auditorium.
So they get me to to the building where the before the war was Polish police station Okay.
She get  a nd she had to pay the police to get the couch what belongs to her daughter.
The police had come to the apartment  whereas I said  my father worked at home  so he would be home during the day  and took him to the local police lockup.
The Jewish police warned many people  like they warned me  about the forthcoming Aktions; a nd if not for them maybe I wouldn't have been alive now with that January '43 incident.
I looked out the window and he spotted me and he was in sort of a Jewish with a Star of David on his sleeve  with a whistle on his neck over here with a uniform Jewish Police  with a hat.
I met one Ge rman lady  and she told me she wakes up in the morning  and she thinks about killing herself  while going shopping.
I like to talk about this experience um with the students because I most  I al-always go to universities and sometimes to um  to um schools who are just next  next year going to the university  I don't know  and I  I  I tell them that I say that very  very uh clear and maybe it seems not absolutely necessary but you should know because hardly ever anybody has talked about it or has written about it  we were a-arrested  and we were brought to Amsterdam  that's where we originally lived  and we were brought to the Gestapo  which is the  where the police or the SS and we were separate taken into another room  and we were asked.
And at that time  the -- the Germans were not in working as the police  or they were not -- didnt have any judges around.
And we were under the auspicion of the foreign police  a special department  the etranger   police etranger.
The ro -- for the roc -- for the majority of the rocket scientists  their connection with the forced labor was in comparison to that of a concentration camp guard  or a police official  relatively marginal.
And no military Polish police on  what do you call it  no police.
We were concerned that the child would be turned in to the police.
The fa ct is that we had gates which were uh guarded by the Gestapo with Polish police  you know  assisting them.
In 1943  in May just a year later  after my father was sent away  I was -- police came and I was taken out and sent away to a labor camp myself.
02:05:22 Along with the German army came the Einsatzgruppen  killing squads.
The slums were a good place  a safe place for people like us to be there b ecause the police were afraid to get in there.
One of the uncles had  would you call it an abattoir  where the kosher killing was done of the big cattle.
But the civil administration also was everything  was also the police.
So I went to the police station and said y ou have to give me permission to leave ; I have to go find my mother   no way.
And they -- the friends were living almost at the top of the building and they could hear the police in the middle of the night  climbing the stairs  knocking on the doors  and so fort h. So their next-door ne ighbor  who was Christia n  got them in their apartment.
The guard mobile  the gendarmes  are the worst kind of police  the  the most brutal  the most uh  uh  the meanest people that they had  they put into the guard mobile.
Before they occupied our town  we weren't  like the killing  the shouting  and then they came on the motorcycles in our town.
But all they were doing was killing the prosecution  and there was a lot of truth in that.
The local police which was in charge of that  of course  knew about it a nd simply looked the other way because it was understandable  you know  people didn't want to lo se their city apartments.
I came to Interview with Morris Rosen August 5  1999 22Vallin  I came to the police  can you tell me I heard there are Jewish girls.
And that when this police chief heard that my father was in Dachau   and had already applied for a visa and had served in the ar my in World War I  he also helped him.
19 01:50:35 And it was just authority  or was there something special about these councils and the police?
So after it started to get a little light outside  we began to see movement and we saw SS soldiers with their insignia on 6 their sleeves and their hats and guns on their shoulders  on the waist and with the big  big police dogs that they were walking up and down and speaking to one other and shouting to one another in German.
I remember some soldiers were there  sometimes sitting and I remember soldiers sitting by the water  and they were killing lice.
The rest of the people the Judenrat and most of the police they took to the cemetery and they killed them.
And something happened in 1944 in May again  there was a  when the biggest killing was going in all the camps and they were killing people by thousa nds and they...Now the group of gypsies come to Krakow Plaushau concentration camp  and there was close to 800 with them  and on Sunday???
But after  there were some military police took it over  yeah.
So they came at night with the Jewish police because they already had Jewish police th ere and they took them and they sent them away.
Oh yeah  yeah  I mean that is  no Gestapo  by its very nature is a secret police  they were in civilian and they were  I mean not conspicuous  even though they themselves were everywhere and they had a whole army of informers who were not actually Gestapo but reported to them.
The other aspect which I see differently from most is that people keep yakking about killing the Jews in Europe   and being unwilling to face up to Hitlers view that all on earth needed to be killed.
We -- we moved away  because all the time was fights  and ni -- ni -- a little bit police and this and this.
Never met anybody who was a chief of police of security police.
And she send me that letter and we present it to the police and I said even that is my sister  but that was not true.
They said send him by air  because the Italians had not yet realized that you can fly and that you can arrive in the country  the border people  the border police was trained.
Exactly one month before the roundup of foreign Jews by the French police.
And I went to school the way I usually did and when I got to the school  the -- the Gestapo or police  I dont remember  I ca -- I still can t tell the difference between one and the other  were standing in front of the school with German Shepherds.
I looking outside one day when three boys going by  and the police are taking them and they said we are not Jewish.
Ilyong Schneidel there had to throw a hand grenade  because he was in the police.
You know  the police inspectors that were there  they were very nice.
They came  killing as much as possible  bombarding ne it was a really very hard time.
I dont remember who wa s -- the police was there  and searching their apartment.
So they went in one direction and the Czech police took over the train and we drove on the train.
Until that time  their affairs  their arrangements  their visa s  the extensions of the visas  the permits to 20 stay  were handled by the police.
In the Hotel Rotterdam  across the street  German refug ees who came over the border without passports  without clothes many times  were chased out of Germany  fled out of Ge rmany  many times broke  desperate at the borders and chas ed into the Netherlands while the state police was waiting to send them back to Germany because they had no papers   they had no nothing.
My father has said if it weren't for my mother and her courage we would never have survived the war  because she again and again and again  she would be the one who who said to my father  you know  it's going to work out and she would she would take on the police who came to the house and questioned them and interrogated them  cause see from their perspective they were interrogated many times about who they were and what they were doing.
She wanted to get another name because she new very well if one family member somehow held back by the police  the whole family goes to hell.
That was before  that was before the Wannsee Conference  when the killing was not really automatic yet.
Now mind you  Breslau was a city of 600 000 people so the police chief was quite somebody.
Again  I was lucky  fortunate at one of the actions  especially the last liquida tion when the police had no control I watched the Germans when they finished with one buildi ng  I kind of got into the building where they finished getting everybody out.
Every time they were rounding people on the streets they -- there were more and more killing  and e -- and there were two big aktions.
So I went to the police station to get permission to leave .
After a short period of time  I am sure that there was -- again  under the influence of Luba and Esther -- he  he instructed me to go to the Chief of the Third Precinct  Police Precinct  Mr. Tomason   a nd tell him he should arrange that Schulgasser should have a second horse and buggy similar to the first horse.
And I saw somebody -- two people running away and the man was yelling for the police.
It happened that one of the local police functionaries was friendly with a certain Jews because of some prior favors th at they had done to each other.
So this is where the Judenrat and Jewish police  you know  played a very constructive role  you know.
Now -- But if you -- if you had a passport issued by Oslo police  you would be interrogated.
And that's when I heard what the farmers said they were killing the people that they took away  were killed.
And the consulate called the police and within 10 or 15 minutes after these hoodlums had entered th-the loft  there was a uniformed brown shirt  who pulled everybody out and stood guard the whole day so that nothing would -- would happen to my grandmothers apartment  because after all  she was a foreign citizen.
Many of them decided to join the political police and they were after the Nazis.
A2: Well  there was coverage  but we had armed military  not just local police  but To protect you?
They were accused of epidemies of infectious sicknesses  of poisoning of wells  of killing Christian children for the -- for their blood  to be used for -- for religious rituals.
The Ukrainian police and the Germansmostly Ukrainianwere they went to the city to eat  to drink  and then they came back to bury them.
The Germans started to get more and more involved  as alwa ys  the police.
Wa s a very difficult job because was in USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0074 55July  its 1968  very hot summer and I work ing on this building  remove this old broken pieces  and come the police.
They only could go to the police stations  to the Questura  and there they found out where German people were living.
And I remember one evening they told us to get out  because there were big gardens there  and sit there  because they were afraid  becau se the Ukraine police  they're looking for Jews there.
Every time a police man would come up to collec t for something or just to come up and say hello  my father froze.
The Jewish police went with wagons a nd pulled out the furniture from the homes.
Interview with Frida Ruderman October 15  2010 47 Who was the Soviet Secret Police  yes  mm-hm.
But they kept you in their police station because they did not know how to deal with you.\
And did you  speaking of movies  have you seen there's a movie that came out a couple of years ago called \ Killing Kasztner\ ?
When he lived before we went to the ghetto  we lived not far from the German police.
So is there a contradiction between working in the supply department and wearing a police uniform?
So that is what the judge brought up  and you know  from the police when I was arrested and went to the police pres -- first through polizei revier Po lizeirevier  and then to the polizei presidio Polizeiprasidium and then the Gestapo until eventually I went to prison  but then things came up.
But see killing your father was not as bad as helping French prisoners of wa r  something like that.
And they protected her  and I -- they s -- I-I dont want to jump ahead  I think Ill let you ask the questions  22 but they were very vital later on in -- in protecting my mother when we were deported  and the secret police  Herr Puetz  would not let my mother to go with us.
Fortunately  right after they -- we heard the heavy steps  and right after we heard that  that the German police was there  we had suspected something  that something is going on.
I think they did that to police here  they back -- they had in Norway at that time.
Theres the German army  and then tell me  who are these police battalions  and who do they work for?
Thats the only thing th at we knew  that the German were killing the Jews in Auschwitz  you know.
These included the Berlin document center  and the German armed forces information agency  as well as regional German police agencies.
People might revolt  so they took them out separate  2  4  6  8 and stuffed them down in a basement in the police station in the plant.
And we want to go to the latrine  we had to call a police -- woman 28 overseer to take us to the toilets.
On one of the visits in the middle of March to my mother's house  I was hardly at home  when there was a knock on the door and a policeman  the local gendarme  came into our living room and said  \ Mr. Schnaittacher  I would like to see you at the police station.\
With one excuse or the other the Nazi police...not the regular police...the regular police would intervene when they had orders but there was also various police forces  Nazi police forces in various neighborhoods of representing various factions which were ferocious.
Could have handed me over to the police  too  right  or the Germans?
And I know what they were doing  they were killing lice  okay?
They brought us to the police  and there were all kinds of our friends over there already sitting.
So  Miller comes in to the entrance of the ghetto and he gives the order  shows the order to the guard and to the Jewish police.
End of Tape Two  Side A Beginning Tape Two  Side B -- And one day we were packing this and the police came in.
They wouldn't help me  so I was...by the way  I came into Belgium not legal  just with a transit for three months and I used to have to be -- have to -- had to hide out because the police was always chasing me. \
And my mother had nerve enough to go every day up to the police station as long as he was there.
And finally I got so scared  I said there's nothing I can do  they keep on following me and I don't know if they were police or they were gangsters.
Well  once again we thought that was quite normal  you know  it is always deep enough for the boat to go right into the harbor and we had stopped outside  and the Cuban police came on and the immigration people  and then suddenly the atmosphere changed and we were told  ﬁnot today  not today  meyenian a tomorrow  tomorrow ﬂ but tomorrow never came  and then people were getting anxious but nobody ever gave up hope.
Besides killing my father  I saw where the brush factory was situated  you could see truckloads of people brought up to the hill.
I didnt realize and couldnt understand that you dont have to go to the police and register.
It turned out that night when the police came looking for me that it was his pay envelope and he was one of the German engineers working.
They must have just of notified the police there and the little boy was left.
There were Polish police  there were the Germans  we also had an observation post on top of the school.
He couldn't see killing people as being just and so he lost his...all his possibility for higher paid work.
Yes  I -- I did -- I didnt see the actual cutting  but I saw the argument between the SA and the police.
The -- the Germans threw the police out that is after I got in court.
And everything was done with money  you could buy yourself out by the German police.
I think that the The Belarusian gendar the Belarusian police  or the The Belarusian.
And who told them  this I dont know  that could have been these were -- Jewish police were telling them.
A nd what these structures were suppose to be was  and I don't know whether that was the hearsay or whatever  but that's what we were kind of hearing  that these were going to be sp ecial extermination places with sort of electrical contraptions that would be electrical crematoria and electrical killing  the high voltage.
A2: She didnt tell you that they left Schluchtern because the policeman  the head of the police came to tell her that her father shouldnt come home any more  the Nazis were looking for him.
The Christian was the mayor the city  commandant of the Thomas Blatt 13 July 26  1996 Page 13 police  the rest only Jews.
I wrote to the Chief of Police in Windsor  Ontario  saying I have met a prisoner in whether it was Buchenwald or the DP camp I've forgotten.
And there was a organized Jewish police community guards  who were guarding on the other side  on the inside of the Ghettowache.
He found the 50 people are registered in -- in police documents who were officially registered as living in a forced residence in Le Chambon.
And one of the things I want you to share is you ended up being taken to the police station.
Believe me  the cruelty of the French police  and the garde-----------  and authorities  was next to nobody.
The Danish police of course had to obey the Danish government  that's the usual attitude.
They used to come with the lorries and pack the lorries wi-with -- with the Jewish people in the terrible  terrible con -- circumstances that -- that they were hitting them and killing them on the way to - on the way to the lorries  and it was plan of -- o-of the Germans.
Discussion that we have to run  we have to g o  because every night was a different killing  to - the few Jews [indecipherable] left over there  when they came back  so they tried to get rid of them.
The Jewish police force 6 was there for the purpose of keeping order within the ghetto.
When you reflect on it and when you see what's happening with the constant rising anti -Semitism  constant rise with ethnic and other killing  the slaughter of Jews and Christians  not only Jews this time  the hatred on campuses  the fact tha t Jews in certain places in Europe -- they are not identifying as Jews anymore because they will be harmed.
They stay -- the Germans and the police  they say what are we doing  faster  faster  faster.
But years prior when they first opened it  they didn't have all of this  so the way they killed the people that they brought there was that they had to dig ditches maybe 10 foot deep and after they dug these ditches  there were lined up against the edge of the ditches and they were shot in the back  killing them and these people fell into these ditches.
They ha d two different kinds of aktion  one was a killing aktion and taking people -- or taking people to the concentration -- extermination camps and another was raup aktion.
Simon Pollack lending a hand to the peasant killing this pig which had to be killed clandestinely at night.
And killing places were also  bit by bit  together with the Jewish community  they were cleaned an d looked after.
And this was a great thing people respected later on because they saw we had only those who were involved of killing Jews.
Nobody to trust  especially you thought them to be the police they want to show off who they are.
By that time I was for a time I was stenographer for the police force and then became a detective and worked there for the duration as a detective until I left in 1949 for America.
And my two brother did follow the police with no resistance  because they  you know  the police said it is just to make a verifica tion of your paper.
We were sitting there  waiting for order and all of sudden I think was maybe the police.
Even the killing of Ernst vom Raim on Kristallnacht was also a miracle because up to that time  the number of Jews emigrating had declined  a nd this many Jews emigrated after this happened  who otherwise would have died in the concentration camps.
Is he going to en list himself to be in the police?
It was huge  and I saw the Jewish  the Jewish police for the first time.
And I remember uh...I remember once these two older girls sort of held me a nd made me watch while they were killing uh a chicken that was going to be used for dinner.
My mother and the rest of my brothers  honest people...never had a police record.
They we come with our police escort; and the landlady  because she was scared when  when they picked us up and  and they came for us  she was screaming at us before they took us. \
And -- and we also -- to take vengeance for the killing of our relatives.
So they  the police came  took away my brother-in-law to a forced labor camp; and my sister was arrested.
And of course  he applied  and it was sent back for the police head quarters  Nazi  they send back  what kind of people to the -- to the -- the party members in Notodden  that -- the Quisling party members.
And but we knew she worked for the French police prefecture.
And trooping to the -- to the police headquarters to turn these things in.
They kept him becau se it was a Jewish firm  and the boss is not there  but he is representing the boss  so he was in the police.
Now the Commissioner of Police  when my father and I were brought to his office  he got up and he shook hands with us and asked us to sit down.
The concept at home before the war was that killing was not a Jewish way.
And he said that there is an aktion in Drohobycz going on that the Germans are killing people that they are taking them away and  if they would come to his apartment and see us there  then everybody would be killed.
The Germans' idea of discrimination of killing the Jews were multiple   they would outright kill them.
As we became friendly with the Germans  which we did by 1946  47...Secretary Burns had led the way on that...they began to put German police in Jewish DP camps  and the Jews didn't like it much.
The rest of the store  all my employees were Black  from management capacity  which at that particular time -- so  in other words  [indecipherable] to the era why the riots broke out in Chicago  because of the killing of Martin Luther King.
We would not allow the police to pick him up  he's a good kid  so let's hide him.
And the man did what  unbelievable  insisted he call the gendarmes and police finally came and he said Madame  perhaps come from Chicago.
She was there  and the other one  they had what they call Einsatzgruppen the killing unit came to the camp every day.
BREAK police chiefs and let him see his brothe r in jail who was later on transported to Dachau and uh so knowing that my father had the Iron Cross and he had it too  my father always wore it in miniature uh form on his uh suit  particularly during the Nazi era  because he wanted to show that he was as good a citizen as anybody else  he did his duty for his country and so on and so.
As I had mentioned earlier also  food was ratione d  the ration coupons were given out to people who were registered with the police  see  the food rationing offices had actually a duplicate of the police registration file.
So I dont know if should put that on the tape  but I ask -- when the Amer ican soldiers -- we were driving around with the military police  I said  ﬁDid you heard of Richmond  Virginia?ﬂ He says  ﬁOh  youre not going there.ﬂ And I said [indeciph erable] you know  so -- I -- thats just what -- I dont know whats going on  you know.
The Jewish police  although not armed  they had baseball bats  all of them  and special hats and special arm bands.
We have  I have few close friends  very close  we were all very close  we know each other  but I was in a much luckier position  uh  uh much lucky b ecause I was a professor before the war  and I was teaching in every Jewish gymnasium in Krakow  and lot of my students were in ---------  and they were a very  very close friend  and I tried to help them as much  and they were trying to help me  and many times happened that they helped me i n  in  in  in the ghetto  for example  one of my students was a  in the police  in the out there  he asked and beg the German to let me go because I was already in a transport to go  and they let him uh  the to the-----------this is a very important person  and he  he let me out  but you see  the  the  the  the respect and love was tremendous.
But I did not like the PPRD  the Palestine Police Railroad DIvision.
I was in that police station  I lived right next door to it.
They knocked on every door and th ey kicked them out on the square  on the school place there with Germans and Jewish police  Polish police around  to watch them who they took out.
And uh the chief of police  Vacero and uh his assistant uh Lieutenant Talesca invited us to their office and they showed us a letter.
Then once the war starts there's a lot going on  a delay in terms of when the mass killing information comes out.
So then they line us up  when the time came  early afternoon or midafternoon  they start marching us  again nobody knows where and marching  marching  marching  heading out of town with police escort with rifles all around and we come to a brick factory and it turned out that the brick factory was turned into an assembly camp for people from all the neighboring villages  all the Jews from the villages  they were rounded up the same day when Jews from Munkacz had been taken to the ghetto.
And the driver  he was a communist and he had to go to the police  I believe every night or once a week so that he didnt run away or something like that.
This was not allowed to the Jews  they had to be brought to the -- not for money  just to -- to brought to the police.
I did not want to stay in the  I could have stayed there because I knew the German  the directors from the factory  the problem came in  I was too privileged  and the Jewish police  some of them were very jealous  so I was afraid some of them might do something  and I gonna have to pay for it with my life  because was  jealousy wa s very bad.
When the police saw me  Im sitting in the window  they used to run.
Go back to your headquarters and tell them that the Na  uh German headquarters called off the killing.\
We went to the French police and they were taken to court.
I had to go to the police every other day to show my fa ce.
The reason that they wrote TTG on their...on their...on these log sheets was when and if they would be stopped by some of the Allied...uh... policemen on the frontiers  etc....uh...when the read  if it's British police and they read TTG on it  that sounds...even though it's a Jewish Brigade convoy...20 convoys or 30 vehicles  etc...uh...they're not going in to see what's inside.
Do you remember at all hearing about this re markable film footage th at Stuart uncovered of this killing?
The crying became like the family  their own police and so on.
They were lost and they came to the police sta tion.
And we were afraid of Jewish  it -- it was Jewish police as well as  you know  the -- they had this Jewish police which supposed to deal along with Ukrainian and Germans  with the order  you know  whatever.
And they were able to do it without actually exterminating  killing too many of them locally.
indecipherable] because without my bicycle I cant -- and then when theyre almost by the police station they let him go  you know.
And also  at that time  the Pope sanctified him  that ye ar  he was some 82 or so  and I know that everybody was extremely respectful of Father Colbert because we had some runaround with some Ital ian police.
And as a matter of fact  the daughter...I don't know her name...who was working...uh...as probably some secretary in the police headquarters  local police headquarters  was helpful to my mother.
And st ories came back home about  for example two men waiting for a street car at a street car stop  telling a joke  not realizing that the man standing behind them was a plainclothes police who promptly arrested them for telling a political joke  and even as an eight year ol d  I knew what that me ant  that you had to be very careful.
Almost everybody had a rifle every -- but the killing is not there.
And one day there had been some fighting and the police brought these -- ha d to break it up and they brought these young men in to me as camp administrato r to be punished.
And so those eggs  the boys were catching turtles  killing them with a rock  big rock  and and taking those eggs out  those poor things.
Sabotage was the ultimat e thing is to kill the person  but to my good fortune  the man who would have the sport to do the killing has left  he was a very high-ranking officer  he left  it was already 11 or 12  and he left I think at 9 o clock.
I was still afraid of the killing and the shooting and the pogroms what was going on.
So they came to me  a German and an Englishman soldier  MP  Military Police.
I come up to the police station and first of the civilian started to beat me and he said in Polish  they said you dirty Jew.
And so I...when I had to report...reply for the police for...uh...for...uh... education in Germany  they asked me  \ Have you been in prison?\
S o before he bribed them but then once the police knew that he couldnt go back because hed always gone back to Austria.
They were killing the English and the Russians and the inmates in the concentration camp.
So I went again to the police  I had the permission to Yugoslavia   actually [indecipherable] needed.
So  the police a lot of times stopped you and asked you for an identity card.
And right away they got a police  put some handcuffs on him  they arrested him  a nd they brought him back to my town  to Koretz.
But nevertheless  the Secret Police got wind of it and arrested the whole group of people  including my mother  and put them on trial.
And then this Mr. what's his name in the jus–  the palais of justice 64 send the police after me every day  every day where I'm going to go  because I was not legal in Belgium  because I was an alien.
>> Jill Pauly: Well  when people go up to see the main exhibit you will see something that -- rolls that has all the laws  the Nuremberg Laws against the Jews  and kosher killing was one of them.
What -- what I was saying wa s that in some cases the children and -- and possibly even the spouse  particularly if the subject met the spouse after th e war  or met her here in the United States  they have no clue that subject X -- that husb and and father X was a concentration camp guard  or was a shooter in a -- in a police squad in the east.
Of course  killers were killing not only the Jews  they were killing also the Poles  and well  Lithuanians  Germans killed themselves.
And when after -- after the war  somebody denounced them  and they were taken to court  and they got -- those two got three years jail for killing the 12 people.
And I think it was he who was responsible for our arrest because he uh  uh reported us to the  to the police.
Well  we ended up  both of us  in the in what they called  well the headquarters of the Secret  Secret police  the Bulgarian equivalent of perhaps the KGB.
But that Heinz Jacobius  he was a tremendous black market artist and he just fed that janitor so well that he surely had no interest in killing the goose that laid his golden eggs.
If they called the police  and looked after the documen ts  they are real.
Go to the police  anybody you trust  and tell them what's going on.
We had our own police that made sure that everything is taken care of properly.
--All I knew is that they are conquering  going from country to country  and killing Jews.
They noticed Germans only at with the killing of the Jews.
And if that potential of legal consequence even works to prevent one killing  I feel that it would be worth that effort  both for the future in terms of prevention  and in terms of bringing closure to the past.
History teaches us its not the first Holocaust we went through  not in this scope  but we know tha -- wer -- were that -- to sin -- crusifi -- to Crusades  because French Huguenots  theres a Christian killing Christians  almost everybody.
The same people that were admiring -- going to museum s during the day or -- the next hour they were capable of killing  massacring  maiming people because they considered the Jews being subhuman  being not of the same cla ss  not the same -- they were not human beings.
In fact  the Jewish police had the honor of being put in the last transport to Treblinka because they were promised that if they cooperate in the round-up of the Jews in the Warsaw Ghetto  that they and thei r families would be spared.
These two police inspector s told my mother  W e're going to report we didn't find you but you must not sleep in your apartment tonight because when we report that we didn't find you  they're going to send maybe the Gestapo or other police and they're going to put some seals on the door.
So people were dying left and right  not because someone was killing you  just plain you gave up.
So thats was a [indecipherable] So when you -- when the police would look at your I.D. card  you -- you did -- you weren't afraid of anything?
The Jewish police got the order to go and get the slave laborers  so that was one part what was what the Jewish police did.
So they came into power... Yeah  the Cuza came into the pow er and uh...after that one day... that one day we have miserably ... everything... and we what we hear also that in Bucharest ... that one day they were killing Jews and they were .... an d uh... the butcher shop s ... in the window.
You know  it was the killing and the kicking and the -- and the -- th-this was already after the walk toward the center.
They were reporting to the police  to the Germans  everything what's there going on  what's going on in the villages.
And Jewish people panicked when they saw German or French police.
And they suddenly start to with machine guns killing the people on the street.
It was a week before Rosh Hashannah  in 1942  when they decided to kill the Jewish population in this the Ukraine  so they surrounded the town with Ukrainian police.
There were  like one of the prisoners in Auschwitz I camp who did the injections you know killing  was a Polish prisoner who did this.
There was a short exchange of bullets and uh it ended up by killing these three uh partisans.
I took the [indecipherable] and I spoke to one of the police officers that -- what I want to do.
A good friend of mine and I decided he decided that his father was an officer in  say  call it the fellow police and they were mounted.
And this family took us in for a couple of weeks until a neighbor reported us to the police.
The Russians waited patiently while the Poles and the Germans were killing each other -- they were in no hurry at that point  they knew they've got the situation covered and they can come in any time.
Un fortunately  he went over to find out why  and when the Polish police saw him  they arrested him.
I was a foreigner there and the police there uh paid attention to me and I had not...I should have registered with the police.
But I got over that  just as I learned to eat corn on the cob  and quite like it now  I got over being accustomed to hearing a siren not meaning an air raid  but mea ning that there is an ambulance going by  or the police is chasing a a traffic violation  o-or whatever.
They  so it would have been pretty im possible really to  to hit the Nazis in Auschwitz without killing off all the Jews and it probably would not have really done very much.
