We had sort of e xpected wed lose some of our civil rights  but certainly we had not expected any danger to our li-lives.
You k now  for one thing  Holland was a a tolerant society in the sense that in 1848 everybody got civil rights  yo everybody became a citizen.
Interview with Alize Barzilay January 23  2014 40 You all were deprived of your civil rights .
Greenwood was a very  you know there was a lot of civil rights activity all summer long there.
Of course  the the tightening of the government  and the the loss of rights brought back a lot of memories.
And I remember how a partisan  a -- a Baltaraiıtininkas on Laisves Alej a  I went there  I was with my star and he took my hand and -- and said  do you know -- don t you know that the Jews have no rights to wear watches?
And human rights is one of the thing we mut -- we ca nnot adjust them.
And the -- the firs t level was half Jews  they were deprived of a number of civil rights  but they were still a lev -- a notch or so above Jews.
60 And that was one of the things that we were deeply involved because we had to make sure that all this does not get tossed out by virtue of the fact that the allied powers have relinquished their -- their rights and prerogatives in Germany.
Something about book burning and taking away the rights of the Jews and putting them in ghettos and I suppose it was I dont remember it was that time or afterwards  but they mentioned about the killing of Jews.
N-Not -- I dont want to push this too much  bu t your interest in human rights  going back to that period of time  is it that you were trying to establish what you thought were the necessary conditions for a society  whereas politics some times undermined those necessary conditions?
Working with th e Civil Rights Division was a great opportunity to learn to practice law and to do something very worthwhile.
I wasnt so invol you know  I wasnt politishin involved or no  you know  with the rights  or what in people need to kno w  or you know  to get to the polls  and people are very much afraid  you know  too.
Yo-Youve seen Civil Rights  youve seen incredible social change and political action  not always of a pleasant sort since you came here.
So if youre born here  we should have the rights here.
I think that when you strip a human being of his dignity slowly  he is not the same person  a nd I think that in a certain way  what the Germans were doing  by putting us into an open ghetto  by taking away some of our rights slowly  it was a conditioning that permitted us to  it made us  that made us uh.
Now  it is in the human nature that its easy to blame somebody  and it makes it easier to handle certain things  and sometimes even governments  in order to put the blame  either for some econo mical disasters or shortcomi ngs  or other shortcomings  needed somebody to blame  and someone who is not protected  or whose rights can be taken away at will  is a -- is a scapegoat.
As a Jewish refugee  what was your reaction to the Civil Rights movement in this country?
No  I actually -- together with a former Harvard pr-professor of mine  we wrote the first American international human rights case book.
And they they took us to Trinidad   which was British  and the reason they did it  Im told  is that the Germans  Rommel in North Africa had had given the Nazis the rights to use airports in Syria .
They were vocal  theyd become articulate  th ey had their committee  they were demanding  they wanted rights.
And he knew very little about international human rights  but was very interested.
By 1935  uh the Nuremberg Laws went into effect  and they uh further disenfranchised uh Jews of all their civil rights  and  and  and it became quite a hardship to  to comply with  with all that uh and civil servants lost their jobs right then and there  and in the meantime  Jewish businesses  the boycott had its e ffect and  and many were  were being throttled to the point of where  where they had to give up or sell to a so-called uh to so-called Aryan management  and many  many people were forced to do that.
Did you feel a connection to the Civil Rights movement here in the United States?
He was all powerful and we had no rights whatsoever  except whatever he  by his own grace  bestowed on us.
Translate what that means in essence  you lose all of your civil rights.
Patriotism for America  for -- for -- for human -- human beings  for human rights.
There were several people who had worked in the Division for a long time  who had been in the Department of Justice and the civil rights area  the government had not been very active.
You know  it was a– they were charged with conspiring to deprive the defendants of their civil rights.
So  you see  it was -- i-it was a atmosphere of you had no rights at all.
And so he asked me to brief him  and give him backgrounds on -- on what was happening in the human rights field in the world at the time  which I did.
Poland is anti-Semitic  and you have no rights and business to go back.\
And actually when I interviewed with the Honors program for the Department of Justice  I dont know how this– as I said  I first went to the Anti-Trust Division  and I cant  dont know that I chose the Anti-Trust Division or chose the Civil Rights Division.
It -- it wasnt until a little later that I got interested in the work of the European Court of Human Rights.
It wa s published in 73 and that Interview with Thomas Buergenthal February 27  2001 26really started teaching of international human rights in American law schools.
And it was coming out of that -- that work  knowing that we could document  and we could take testimony  and we could supply evidence of human rights violati ons to organizations and institutions concerned with human rights  including the United Natio ns  but that we werent actually treating the survivors.
Minorities were given their rights  they could have their own schools  their own newspapers and so on  but they were permanently excluded.
In the 60s in this country  did you have any response to civil rights efforts here  and the segregation and -- di-did any of those struggles resonate with you in any way?
First of all  the problem of civilian control over the military and how we protected the rights of the individual soldier against any intervention from the top.
But the only good thing about it  he had  under the bill of rights  GI Bill of Rights  he could go to school and they paid the tuition.
No I would related it to the past experience if we  like all people who live together for 50 years have differences of opinion  then it is more due to the change of the culture in which you live in that has occurred over those 50 years and Im particularly referring to the change of womens rights for instance.
I just hope that in my own generation and in my own family and in my own children...uh...not only I hope but I make sure that there is awareness of the fact that we're all brothers and sisters  that we're all...to the extent that we discriminate or deprive of rights another human being  we do it to ourselves.
I'm really  absolutely I'm glad th e way things turned out that everybody gets more and more Interview with William Luksenburg 31 rights.
You see  i-it was very important to go to state school  to be ab le to pass that the examination  the baccalaureate  because that gives you rights to go to university and become an officer in the army and so on.
The reason I ask is Hitler deprived people  Jews  of their civil rights so I was just wondering Well I was always very sympathetic.
Speak up for human rights and be there; speak up for bullying.
And that was– of these three civil rights workers who were killed.
The Civil Rights movement [indecipherable] Yes  well that was different  I mean  then well -- knew -- everybody knew and so many of my students went on freedom rides  very close friends of mine went on freedom rides  and so that was totally different.
And Id really like to discuss that more and maybe it would make more sense to do that after weve really discussed your work here and with the Civil Rights Division so that it can be put more in context.
So again  a balance never  I see that generally is the answer to most of lifes problems is to find a balance that takes into account both the common and individual rights.
But it wasnt just specialize in international law  it was also specializing -- specializing in human rights  which wasnt exactly on the -- No  that didnt even exist  and there I -- it started out  I think  with the perception -- I-I dont know  Ive often been asked  wa -- is it my experience that drove me to it.
And I think my mother probably gave me some inspiration too  stand up for your rights.
Then I think I have to do something  I must wr ite to anybody and to fight for my rights.
And those extreme rights were [indecipherable] the Nazi fifth column  you know  were anti-Jewis h. That  of course  connected with my father  from his private life.
But Im sure that what  that going in to the civil rights work and being  and wanting to do public service work has been to some extent influenced by  and maybe a large extent  probably a lot of it is subconscious  the fact that I want to feel th at the contribution I can make in helping other people in this country  who are not as well off  is just a way of helping to give back.
Well  I thought I I I wrote her a note when my when my book came out  and the movie rights were bought.
And its now -- and then for the next -- I had two terms  and I was re-nominated by Costa Rica and by Columbia and I served for -- for 12 years on the court  and we really laid -- in those -- we had some bi -- I had some wonderful colleagues  and we laid the groundwork for a human rights tribunal which today is playing an important role.
The truth is  I didnt have no views whet her Civil Rights.
So  do you remember anything about the Civil Rights movement going on?
So it started as a way of stripping the Jews of property  shipping most of the Jews  like 85 percent of the Jews into annihilation camps  and then whoe ver was left  depriving them of all the civil rights and -- and property and radios and fur coats and -- and automobiles  and -- and -- you know  th-there was a long list  I still have those lists of what you can or cannot do  and what street you can be on  what is your curfew  whether you can have a window looking at the street  or not looking at the street.
So their laws were made  and carried out against Jewish citizens  depriving them of their civil rights and their freedom.
You have people 67 like Benjamin Ferencz and like Henry King of Ohio  who have since the Nuremberg trials  dedicated their entire  have spent this past 50 y ears dedicated to the streng thening of international law  to the perpetuation of the Nuremberg pr inciples and to the cau se of human rights.
It was sort of a sidelight  but I mean Congresss commitm ent to civil rights was not great either.
That I should be on the Truth Commission for El Salvador  that I should be on the InterAmerican Court of Human Rights  that I should sit on the UN Human Rights Committee.
Civil rights leader who coined term ﬁblack power ﬂ which became a rallying cry for blacks frustrated with th e movements innefectivenes s under the integrationist mandate of such leaders as Rev. Martin Luther King  Jr. 27 Bob Moses  1935--.
And there were a number of civil rights marches during the summer  that summer with James Farmer and others 35.
And that produced a book on this recommendation th at had been -- that had been adopted  and led to my involvement and -- on human rights issues -- anything relating to human rights at UNESCO at that point  I was involved in one way or the other.
Most of the work the Division was involved in involved voting rights at the time.
And tried to get an interview with– I think the Civil Rights Division was almost impossible to get in to  because there were only– they only had about eight lawyers that were doing civil rights work.
But all things considered  that things have improved  and theyre improving constantly with civil rights.
And the plaque acknowledged the role of the role of the Jewish community in aiding the growth of the city because that  at the time  was kind of the system of the aristocracy before Germany and they sold rights to the -- when coal was discovered  they didn't want to get their hands dirty and they sold rights to entrepreneurs who started mining the areas and started the steel industry and that area became kind of the east end.
There were also some changes in Civil Rights in this country.
Since your family and you and many othe rs were deprived of their civil rights when Hitler came into power  did the Civil Rights movement here in the United States reverberate with you in any way?
They wanted rights within the camp  as far as I remember.
But in the -- y-y-you cannot take away the rights from people.
But Im talking about western Europe  so-called civilized western Europe  which includes our good friends the French  and -- and -- and the Belgians  and the Germans and par ticularly the Austrian and the Slovaks  and the Hungarians and the Romanian  etcetera  etcetera  all did that in a very methodical  prescribed  legitimate method  which means that they could argue that they were proceeding through the sovereign rights of the state to take measures USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0076 98which they considered necessa ry to defend their social and economic well being.
By that time Jews in many Germany had no civil rights  no citizenship.
I just dont think I realized as I was going through law school  I mean as I say  I went to Atlanta and in terviewed with a couple of firms  with some firms  one of which did a lot of civil rights wor k. And it was a small firm  and then I came back and I interviewed with the Department of Justice.
The second one  I can tell you thats not connected with the -- is the Bill of Rights  because everybody is created equal.
Our experiences are reminders to all people in every place  in every corner on this earth to become guardians of human rights  dignity  and freedom forever. [
One of the th ings that you mentioned in the last interview that I thought you might want to comment on now  is that you said it was the beginning of the Nixon administration and you were seeing that that there was kind of a move away from real advancement with civil rights.
It said if a certain percentage of voters had not voted and if they used a test or device  like a literacy test  if these various criteria were met then it triggered the application of the Voting Rights Act.
RG-50.549.05*0001 82 Were there any civil rights activities going on in Saint Louis during the time that you were there?
While in Italy the 50 000 Jews lost their civil rights in 1938 with Mussolinis Aryan manif -- manifesto  in Greece  thanks to the Italian commander general Carlo Geroso  we enjoyed all civil liberties.
But how did you  as a Holocaust surviv or  see this civil -- Civil Rights issue?
The other question was la te 60s  mid-60s  what impact did the civil rights movement have on you  if any?
I never asked them about that but I think they must have been concerned about  you know  the wave of anti -Semitism and all the measures that were taken in Germany to deprive the Jews of their basic rights.
I mean Ive spoken a few times  not recently about the legal developments of these  of how we put th ese cases together and the Voting Rights Act and the impact of the Voting Rights Act.
Interview with Helen Schwartz March 1  2010 26 Did you relate in any way  to the civil rights movement?
Well  being citizen of this country  I felt whatever this country does  I felt  you know  it's right  because they're lead er of the world and they  you know  the men on the street got rights but other countries did not.
Were you active in -- in the United States  were you active in the Civil Rights movement?
And it all sort of came together in this instance around the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
And unless thos e things come together somewhere  its become part of my  sort of distant past  except for re unions of Civil Rights Division lawyers and some of the ongoing contacts Ive had with people.
Im not a very political person  wa the only thing no  not the civil rights  no  I A sensitivity  in a wa do you feel you have a greater sensitivity to it?
And started to see  I think  how I  that I could  that it would be very challenging to be involved in the Civil Rights struggle through the legal  using the law.
Considering people were deprived of their civil rights during the '30s and the '40s.
We were talking about your activity in the Civil Rights mov Well  I was not I was not active.
I -- I once had a possibility  it looked like a possibi lity to -- to serve on the European court of human rights  and we deba ted the issue of whether we would live in Europe .
The only people who could live -- I mean  we lost our rights to live.
One thing I left out is that af ter I got out of the US Army  I took what was known at the time as a GI Bill of Rights which allows you to study.
Because although life was difficult under the Hungarians  we lost our civil rights and freedoms and opportunities to make a living and go to school and all of that  but we were in our homes and we were still a unit  a family.
Its not as significant still as the -- as the European Court of Human Rights  which is much olde r now  but it is doing some good  and its trying to -- to have an important role in -- in Latin America  particularly.
And that began to interest me  but it wasnt only human rights  it was also -- and this is fascinating considering where I am today -- what also interested me was international tribunals.
And Eleanor Roosevelt at that time  said  ﬁThis is a fi ne declaration on human rights  but without some legal obligations  will governments be inspired to see that these rights are enforced?ﬂ And of course  that was a very incisive comment.
We have no rights  we have no prop erty  everything is taken from us.
Im sure that my histor y and the persecution that Jews had  what we went through as a family and as Jews had a lot to do with my wanting to participate in the Civil Rights Movement.
And then one day I was sitting in my office on one of those sunny days in -- hot days in Texas and the phone rang  and somebody with a Latin American accent identified himself as coming from the embassy of Costa Rica  and said that he was calling to ask whether I would permit Costa Rica the honor of nominating me to the inter-American court of human rights.
I met Jean in the Civil Rights Division of the De partment of Justice.
The declaration of -- of human rights by the General Assembly was USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0004 25 [indecipherable] related to the rights we ex -- expounded at Nuremberg.
This is a way of trying to put together a picture about a juror without contacting the juror directly and trying to be somewhat respectful of the ju ror and also  not to infringe on anybodys rights  but simply trying to learn as much as you can.
Like the guys had all th e rights  the guys have all the powers.
Theres a s-special reason why I -- Im in favor of the Civil Rights movement  because I see what happens if its not -- And your feelings politically  do you think they have been influenced by your background?
And now I'm on the UN Human Rights Committee  and we're doing the same.
I was elected to the inter-American court of human rights  and had to stop my involvement with UNESCO.
Before that  there were three people teaching human rights in the United States.
Well  I think it was very important for them to have the -- th-the -- our Civil Rights were terrible.
And they had to beg for any money  and so there were very few of us and we worked on these voting rights cases  it took an enormous amount of time and it was hard to do more than two or three of them.
And restored all the minority ethni c rights to -- to the -- its -- its ethnic minorities.
Did you in the 1960s course  you were just getting settled  but there was 60s and 70s was the big civil rights movement.
I wanted to ask you about the Civil Rights Move ment in general and yo ur perceptions of its various goals and conflicts within the move ment.
Interview with Thomas Buergenthal February 27  2001 4 What -- do you consider this -- this new work  or this job as sort of a crowning continuation of your very distinguished career in international law  and international human rights  or is it also -- or is it a difference -- somewhat different direction?
Anywa y  so he was traveling back and forth to try to take care of the estates  but with the esta tes being in [indecipherable] because of expropriation rights  especially minorities who had visibly remained Aust ro-Hungarian in spirit.
And thats why  it became  during Civil Rights movement  so important for me -- ev ery African American  every black person I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0035 53 met  Id say  ﬁDid you vote?
So he gave up his rights to me  which meant no contact.
What about the the womens m ovement for for womens rights?
And we worked around the clock often  you know  so I mean came the Civil Rights Act in the 60s and I said  Joe  are you gonna eat at Franks?
Interview with Rosa Weinstein September 19  2013 35 Because you and your family were deprived of your civ il rights in Austria  were you when you were an adult active in any of the civil rights movements or movement here in the United States?
Th e big difference is that in the Civil Rights Division  we didnt live in those communities and th at we came and went.
And my cousin  who had been under the G.I. Bill of Rights became a watchmaker.
I mean you came from a situation where your civil rights were deprived and your parents and so forth.
Not only would he be reading philosophy books but he also was a scholar in his own mind with the tumult and all the laws of Jewi sh rights.
And he involved me in the work  and he -- he is -- he became the chairman of their human rights committee  and made me a member of the -- of the committee.
These laws here were based on our Constitution  which again it contains the Bill of Rights.
And sort of put human rights  gradually  on that little map.
]
That was the time of the GI Bill of Rights  after World War Two and there was such an influx of students that they needed to do something to - to house them.
Or are they just excuses by the leaders who -- who want to violate their rights?
And it also gave blacks some confidence to wi n. But for the broader picture to change  we also helped write the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
I feel everybody should have the the the their rights  but what you see on television can only aggravate you  but you have no power of doing anything.
>> Albert Garih: Well  these rules for us -- b asically these rules were the statute of the Jews  we're depriving the Jews of most of their basic rights.
The -- Im wondering if you were impacted slightly differently because of your experience by -- by pivotal events of the last 50 years  whether its the civil rights movement  the -- the wars today  the ethnic cleansing today  the Eichmann trial.
The Germans created  right -- these guys fantasized and invented a system of s uper race and super -- you know the history  Interview with Al fred Lakritz April 3  2008 49you dont want me to talk  but it is important in my part of the story that now French laws follows and equates  right  in its anti-Semitism and a -- and its limitation on -- on -- on the rights of Jews  and certainly ab solutely on the rights of immigrant Jews.
If you didn't  that was good enough cause for the Germans to beat you  kill you  or whatever it is because we had no rights  so he did not have to bring in front of the court or anything like that.
We thought in because we knew about persecution that persecution -- because we didn't have the same rights as the Poles of for th at matter the Ukraine  but these were true persecutions they were telling us.
Because of that  we felt -- I felt  that she was the privileged  she wa s the best liked  she had all the rights  I didn't have any rights because I was the youngest  okay.
During the Civil Rights movement here in the United States -- In the 60s. --
I am -- I am for equal rights  I am for freedom  and for respect to everybody.
And I think most important thing is to educate the public everywhere  then there was a meaning to the universal declaration 84 of human rights  to make sure that see will never happen again to the Jewish people  to the antiFascist  to the anti-Stalin  to everybody else.
I went to attend a conference of the Israeli and Palestinian Physicians for Human Rights.
To us it was...I even believed some of their slogans  see  about uh rights of minorities  because the left persecuted the Jews  Jews couldn't a job.
To be honest  I see no infringement of my rights if therere gonna be tracers in these fertilizer things.
But its one of those societal problems that we have to deal with  so we are very interested in the rights of children and the rights of these women.
And with that you have the rights and privileges of an American citizen.
It should stop with these hate groups  it should stop with the with the KKK  they shouldnt have their rights with the First Amendment  Im sorry.
Were you active in the civil rights movement  because what happened to the Jews  being deprived of their civil rights?
Already between '33 and '38 a lot of Jews had lost their civil rights.
He was was from the radical party  but a great fighter for human rights  for for civil right s and so on.
And so then there were the professor who -- who knew laws  and knew the -- then we read the Declaration of Independence  and the Bill of Rights  and oh  this is what we should have  and -- but the most thing -- everything agreed on no more dictatorship  and then brought into the question  what about the Marxist Leninist  thats a dictatorship.
And the same story was  in r eading on further  one would know that Jews no longer can attend any schools  Jews can no longer own any businesses  Jews no longer have rights and that was stating according to the rules of Nuremborg.
They -- the statute of the Jews based on the Nuremberg Laws depriving Jews of most of their basic rights.
And when I was there  I was asked by the Physicians for Human Rights if I would help th em in the case of a Palestinian where it had become obvious from the papers that had been found of his interrogation  that he had been tortured in order -- in order for him to confess  whether I will be prepared to help them.
In other words  to take heed of peoples protection  their human rights  to be part of that.
Wa -- Ive never quite understood what that meant  that it was a mistake that if they had done it better  I suppose they could have -- and those are the things we are struggling with  we are dealing with when we are dealing with human rights violations  that we have to create in the world a sense that these are no -- not mistakes.
Civil Rights movement  Im sure that you were aware of things that were going on in this country in the south  and - Yes. --
The atmosphere around  in Mississippi and Nesh oba County among the  in the white community and among the Klan  that particul ar group of Klansmen  Sam Bowers 63  the mastermind of this one  who also was behind the firebombing of another African-American  who was a voting rights leader in Hattiesburg  Mississippi.
Were you aware o-of  or did you take a particular interest in -- in anythi ng such as McCarthyism  or the Civil Rights Movement  or anything?
You mentioned the -- Martin Luther Ki ng and the Civil Rights movement.
And I shil -- I toola -- I shiz  you know  I told him that I will call to committee of people rights  which did not exist.
And the rights of t hose people murdered  laying there  have a right at least -- I dont say its gotta be the Magen David  or anything  but they have -- or the eternal light  but have a right not to be converted now  y -- after death  posthumously.
They returned all political rights and legal -- legal dif -- off -- legal defense.
So I always must bring it to him the idea  that yes  killing is not right  but defending oneself is the right that he must never forget  no matte r who it is  when your life is threatened  you USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0062 64 also have the law of rights for you to go ahea d and defend your life.
Shes a woman who grew up on a farm and became a real strong voting rights activist.
But they were under very  very -- how do I put it -- had no rights of any kind.
It was unbelieve...unbelievable and we realized  finally  that we have no rights.
Now when this happ ened with the Civil Rights movement  of course when I was working in the department of Social Services in New York  we had also many people who were different colors  Orientals and other people of Interview with Jacob Wiener October 25  1998 22different colors and I was always very good with them  and never had any problems.
He lose his pension rights in Romania  he was there almost 20 years in Romania  he lose that pension  if he go  if he  when we left Israel  even for a year  you lose your   the means you are not any more  I mean he was in that situation  I  m y job was open  he lose his job over there and when I went to his job place  they said that they filled out his job with a Russia guy because in that time start to come the Russia  not too many  but a few.
You saw the Civil Rights moveme nt and you saw the sexual revolution.
And in England  even though they legally gave me all the rights  they didn't -- they didn't love me like  you know  in Israel.
But as I said  the Voting Rights Act  I dont think  would have been passed  certainly it wouldnt have been passed as quickly  and Im not sure it would have been passed at all  without the Selma marc h and the demonstrations and  I guess  Martin Luther Kings conviction that gradually the country would recognize how wrong segregation was and that you were simply trying to provide to all citizens of this country the rights to which they were secure.
So  she came to work right  probably right about the time of the Voting Rights Act.
So I was working for a few days and the German woman who was in charge said that I the rights and ?
This government is a government of law  and we have a Constitution to preserve our legal rights.
In the teaching area  I -- my former professor at Harvard and I -- did the first American case book in international human rights.
And again  if this becomes a habit of political behavior and a legal response to regimes that violate human rights  this might make the world a better place.
And the Jews have the same rights like everybody else but they had the same rights before too  they had even better rights.
Lets say they said that you have right for speech  you have freedom -- I dont know  a lot of freedom actually  when it comes to realize these rights  you dont have them.
At the very end  the only person who can conduct the ceremony was Rumchovsky -- the Rabbis had no rights to do anything of this kind.
This is si tape five  side B. Because you saw people deprived of their civil rights in in Germany in the 30s  do you think that makes you more sensitive  or did it make you more sensitive to the Civil Rights movement here in the United States ?
The jury went out  the fellow who put the case on was named St. John Barrett  who was the Second Assistant of the Civil Rights Division  who is a good friend of mine 31.
Whats the difference it make if you -- if you have the same rights  why not?
I mean here Jews were deprived of their civil rights in Europe.
Well  you know  in those years  in my -- my times -- youre talking 55 years ago  there was no such thing as Civil Rights  there wa-was only such a thing as good people versing not such good people.
But I cannot speak to a person whos older than me  or my age  because that -- that language that [indecipherable] all of this here  yelling  and [indecipherable] wa s only the way to confuse the Jews  and -- and make them -- firs t strip them from rights  then strip them from anythings that they could  be that it s food  and they really -- killed out the intelligentsia first  so we were people that it was not enough left of the intelligentsia  nor enough left of -- in us  to be able to resist  and thats why we didnt resist in as many --- more than it should have been.
But he had given up his rights to me  that in order for me to be adopted  the Jewish Childrens Bureau  I think it was the bureau  had placed placed an ad in the paper at the time  in 1946 or 47  saying that unless you claim Interview with Ginger Lane September 28  2016 38 rights to this child  she will be placed for adoption.
The Bill of Rights literally was That was my motivating factor. [
Id like you to reflect back on some of the things from the 60s  like the the Vietnam war an-and Civil Rights  and Womens Moveme nt.
And I mean  I felt I had my rights  and I felt USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0068 70empowered to do that.
There was definitely segregation  there was discrimination  and it got to the point  especially the further south well  we there were reports  when th-the civil rights movement was going on  that Jews didnt want the young people Jewish young people coming down.
But I think thats where our government needs to take strong stands about peoples individual rights and privileges and responsibilities.
Civil rights movement  I had bad experience because when I came to this country I came to the country of the free.
There was no protected because not only had I lost my my my name and my hair and my clothing and my fam ily...I also had had lost comple tely my my right to claim any human rights.
The Division had very few lawyers working on civil rights cases when I started in 1962.
Much of my work has been in -- in law in education  and first amendment rights.
And I did spend some time in Louisiana working on the  wh en they first brought in federal observers to watch elections  because under the Voting Rights Act people could register automatically by signing their name.
And they had a voting rights  they were all at a meeting in a church one night.
After that  they moved a lot of agents from othe r parts of the country to Mississippi and Alabama and began to use agents who did not live and grow up in those areas to investigate civil rights matters.
You're living here in a country where the Jews have all the privileges and all the rights  and you are trying to away?
So when people come to me and say human rights are relativis tic I always ask  does that mean that the people who say that want to be -- that in some countries that they really want to be killed  that they want to have their arms chopped off  that they want to have these things done to them?
>> Gretchen Skidmore: So you and your family felt like you had full rights in your town and in your community.
And it was that way in the Civil Rights Division  to have a position where you can help to provide better opportunities for African-Americans in this country  by working  by using the legal system to make  to break these barriers dow n. And to do the same thing in my present job or what Ive been doing for almost thirty years for poor people  to give them a chance to be on the same playing field or to level the playing fiel d for them  at least when theyre trying to make their way through the legal system  or when theyre in trouble.
You know  I wish I could say  well I wanted to go to law school so I could help  so I could go to work for the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice.
Were you active at all in the civil rights movement in the United States considering you came from a country that deprived the Jews of their civil rights?
There was a– they have a small voting rights museum there.
Do you have any special attachments to the civil rights movement here in the United States  again  because of your experience?
The Hungarian government did make many restrictions and took away our rights and liberties and property  but they did not expel their Jewish citizens.
It was the first case under the Voting Rights Act in Selma  where they were still using paper ballots.
When you were involved in -- in issues with voting and d -- yo-you said you were very aware of your -- your rights as a -- as a citizen.
Uh  I would then inform them what their rights were  I would check and find out what the food situation was.
In the 19 -- starting in the mid-1950s a nd then especially in the 1960s  were you following the events of the Civil Rights movement and did that -- did that have any sort of resonance for you  that -- that heres this minority struggling for -- for equal rights?
I worked on the fo rmulation of the covenants on human rights  the two covenants  international -- on the international convention against racial discrimination  on the conventions of the INO and of the UNESCO  discrimination in occupation and discrimination in education.
When I got to Washington and they pu t me in the Anti-Trust Division I asked to go to the Civil Rights Division.
You could have been killed every day  everybody could have arrested you  everybody who ever wanted could point the fingers that you are a communist or whatever [indecipherable] you didnt have any rights  put it this way.
There were many social upheavals in this country  the Civil Rights movement  the Womens movement.
And he had already enlisted men and the officers separated  but he didn't get anywhere because he to ld them  you don't help I make you aware of your rights  you dont have to tell  if it would be ag ainst you  and so on.
Tal lets talk a little bit about the th e Civil Rights movement in this country  the for blacks that were looking to Mm-hm.
You mentioned the -- the Feminist movement and the Equal Rights Amendment and the -- the -- that that was sort of interesting to you.
They are here for a reason  they are human beings  and just like anyone else in America  they came in by the same rights.
And he was preparing to go to -- to Israel and now you can go  I dont have the rights to stop.
>> Bill Benson: As you said  you were stripped of all your rights  so you had no rights under the circumstances.
So when -- when women were fighting for Equal Rights in the United States  in the 1960s and 70s  could you relate to their -- to their struggle?
And of course  Jews got all the rights ar -- citizens and Lithuanians have absolutely equal rights.
The policemen had no rights of any sort  just gather together the 31 people in the morning.
Im sure that all of this Holocaust history is very much a part of  or ha s contributed a great deal to what Ive been doing in my later life  in this work that I do a nd the work I did in the Civil Rights Division.
But I didnt -- you know  I didnt get into it  into the civil rights movement.
Theres a lot of bookkeeping well  a lot of it was ha-ha ndling the well  okay  th my my duties were representation to the United Nations  to the appropriate offices of the Interview with Charles Stein June 8  1999 61United Nations  the high commissioner for refugees  the U.N. high commissioner for disaster relief  the international Red Cross and all the other international organizations that had any d ealings with with refugees or dis or any of the human humanitarian affairs  including the human rights.
You said that you were so sensitive to the civil rights movement because of what you had experienced.
Since you lived at a time and in a country where peoples civil rights were taken away from them in Hungary were you in any way active in the civi l rights movement here in the United States.
Anyway  Il l -- Ill become -- come to they murdered -- killing -- oh  t-talking about human rights and that.
We are human rights activists in a way  not of any organization  but in our way.
I mean  blind folks are not going to be pilots  rights or no rights.
And -- and the world in which you want to live by then -- You see  but dont -- dont forget  at that time being an individual still meant something in -- in -- in -- in soci -- societal layers in which you could claim to have some residual rights  if you were V.I.P.  cooperating with the Germans.
However  as soon as the German Army arrived in the general area  in our town  they instigated  instituted  the Nuremberg Laws where Jews lost all of their rights and all of their protection.
My dad  no  because he wasn't harmed in any way  except all his rights were taken away from him.
So it -- it did show the negative and the positive  you know  the fact that you can stand up and -- for your rights.
And then either the U.S. Attorney co-operatively with lawyers from the Civil Rights Division  or– would make that pres entation  but we left.
And then I tell them  ﬁSuppose one day somebody comes and says  ‚You have no more rights.
And I guess  during the time that you were -- your sons were young  was the beginning of the protest -- the movement in th e United States  Civil Rights protest.
You were raising your children -- well  in the post-war era there were so many changes in the culture here and some of them happened very quickly  particularly in the 60s  when -- when there was the -- the -- the landing on the moon and the -- the Vietnam War  late 60s and -- and then the Feminist movement and th e Civil Rights movement and then there was the Free Love and you mentioned dru -- your fear of -- of your kids getting involved in drugs  but wh -- did you feel like all of the -- did you feel any identification with these movements that were happening  or interest in -- in these movements or did you sort of want to protect your family from -- from all of thes e changes?
He got in a uh...what the Germans called \ Treuhander\  [ Trans: \ trustee\  or \ caretaker\ ] --a...a German person who actually took over the management of the plant --and he had very...he had no rights anymore then at all.
We were living the life of people who have no rights to be  to live  to aspire  to hope  anything.
And I didnt live Interview with Michael Lin February 27  2000 91through Civil Rights movement during the 60s over here  I was in the 70s.
And that is  when a person  right  is part of an environment where this country denies to one group the rights and privileges guaranteed under the Constitution and the law  and it denies them indirectly or otherwise  by use of the law  then somebody has a right to be angry.
Was that something you paid particular attention to  because in mentioning Hitler  who took away others civil rights  were you more attuned to this?
Ah  but also he worked in the underg round  because he was working with the Polish workers  and they wanted to they were fighting for their own rights  in order to receive proper payment  and to be properly treated.
During this same time in America  there was the Civil Rights Movement going on with black people.
During the Civil Rights struggl es -- struggle in the 60s and 70s and so forth  and knowing what you did about Hitlers taking away the civil rights of countries  again  was there any special meaning to you about that struggle here?
S he is able to work on immigration issues and human rights.
But  you know  the most gratifying thing is to -- it's often occurred to me when I worked in Zepuan sitting on the case or when investigating human rights violations in El Salvador or now at the UN -- to think that somebody who had survived Auschwitz is given the opportunity to be working in this field now.
Which is the section that has responsibility for the police brut ality cases  these conspira cy cases like the civil rights workers.
The Civil Rights movement  I feel was the greatest thing that happened in United States  by changing the course of events.
And as far as the Civil Rights movement  did you have any particular identity with -- When I was here?
We like you  you must return our rights to us now because you brought shame on us.
It sounds like you were also active in civil rights efforts [indecipherable] Yes  and I -- and I s -- I still am.
What about political situations here  for instance  the Civil Rights movement.
Do you think that your awareness of and to some extent your direct experience of persecution of the Jews during World War II  affected your  influen ced your interest in working for civil rights for blacks?
And that end of when it came with the Civil Rights movement  meaned for me that I am -- want to be part of that  to bring it forward.
That was the way we generally did our– and the bigger cases like this three civil rights workers case  there were many of us who– The Neshoba County– The Neshoba County case  there were a number of us who did investigative work  both in the black community– we had a lot of FBI agents.
But it was when I began to realize that torture and other human rights viol ations were going on in so many countries in the world.
I meant because your parents civil rights and your civil rights were taken away.
They had different rights; just in this place was a camp for Italian men.
I think the reason for this was th-that I  even as a child  and I would have just been 12 years old then  viewed Martin Luther King as -- as a champion of -- well  obviously he was a champion of civil right s  but I mean a -- a champion of rights without being a revolutionary.
ﬂ And t his is what we have to remember: that we are all human and that every living person has the same rights as we do to live in peace and health and happiness.
Whos a very prominent figure and w ho continued to be a prominent figure after these  in later days when the Voting Rights Act was passed and blacks did get the right to vote.
When all heads are shaved   all human rights denied And all wear the same kind of striped dress When to worship God becomes a crime Then the whole world is in a very terrible mess.
You had specialized at that time alrea dy in international law  and you were also interested in -- in human rights  international human rights at that point.
And I think  probably  one of the reasons they asked me to speak was because they related  they knew that I was Jewish and that I had been involved as a legal services lawyer and perhaps as a Justic e Department lawyer in some civil rights issues over time.
So I had an interest  an academic  theoretical interest really  later on a bit  but then it was no  I was not active in the civil rights movement.
What about the -- the way blacks were treated here  and the beginnings of the Civil Rights movement and -- what was it like for you -- I mean  there are very few blacks in Europe probably  when you were growing up.
You know  there were constant fights for  you know  equal rights  and -- and what have you.
And also to help start this legal services program  which was  had sort of a small beginning in mo untain peoples rights.
And that ha s been enabled me  8 United Nations Educational and Cultural Organizations Thomas Buergenthal 61 November 28  1995 Page 61 in fact  to be on a human right s court and be put in positions of being able  I think  to do a great deal in the human rights area  and to be ta ken seriously in the human rights area without being viewed as somebody who has a political agenda.
As a leader of the Mississipp i KKK  authorized the murder of Mickey Schwerner  one of the three civil rights workers murdered in Neshoba County  MS  in 1964.
And certainly having the Division and John and the people who– I mean we didnt have the Kennedys come to our wedding  but everybody  a lot of the people from the Justice De partment and the Civil Rights Division and our associates.
And in September of 1935  during the Nuremberg and the Nuremberg laws were passed  which in simple terms simply took our citizenship away  it made us residents wi thout any rights to [go].
I had to use the th-the the chaplain we had the rights to do that  for purpose of trying to save lives.
You were here in the 70s in the United States and of course there was the big Civil Rights movement that started in the 60s here.
Whether it 49 was the McCarthy hearings or the Civil Rights moveme nt or even the Japanese internment centers  I mean were there events here that you had a particular  particularly strong reaction to?
One of the big damage that -- mu-much damage has been done to human rights advocacy by people who politicize it as lawyers.
But he had starte d a law firm and was involved in a lot of civil rights activities  and there had been an attempt to bomb his house.
So they stripped you slowly of all your right  and before you knew it  you were like a slave  you had no rights at all.
Its just  its insanity to  to scream about  from my perspective  about everybodys right to  to bear guns versus the  the communitys rights to some  to a sense of safety.
And I think the clients have been– always from the first day  even when I was in the Civil Rights Division when I represented the United States  I always ad mired them a great deal.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0017 63 And what about -- were you -- were you aware and following issues during the civil rights era of -- I certainly was.
Also in this country  I wanted to ask you about the Civil Rights movement.
Civil rights activist; as Missi ssippis first field secretary for the NAACP  instrumental in desegregation of Ole Miss. 29 Fannie Lou Hamer  1917-1977.
The only one if I have is that the Jews helped the Civil Rights  I do know that.
Here you had been deprived of your civil rights growing up.
The Civil Rights movement was a -- some thing that  again  it was some -- my -- my kids marched  all of them  at all ag es.
I mean here you lived in a country that deprived people of their civil rights.
We had a little tough time getti ng off the ground  because the  we had some disagreements about how to do this the best wa y. Some people  some of the mountain peoples rights members thought that it was more important to organize  to organize work with low-income groups like the Welfare Rights Group  rather than doing lawyering work.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0063 10 Positively  I wa -- I -- I am -- definitely would trust -- its a different system  you know  in the United States  its a democratic system  and every citizen has its rights  and the Constitution protects every cit-citizen.
So we filed an action under the Voting Rights Act to require them to count those ball ots.
And otherwise I like the rights  individual rights for individual people and especially as a Jewish person we enjoy very much rights and freedom in this country.
And human rights  international human rights law was not really considered law.
And that -- a lot of that used to happen because we didnt have trained human rights lawyers around  so people would make big speeches and claim that they had found certain things  and then they were proved wrong and -- and they suffered in terms of prestige.
After the Civil Rights Act and then the Voting Rights Act was 1965  then I was in what we called the Southeastern section  that was Alabama and Louisiana.
But i -- what I think is true is this  that I felt from my concentration camp experience  where we always looked to the U.S. and to England to save us  really  that one had -- that in a situation where one was in trouble from a human rights point of view  one couldnt rely on the domestic scene or the domesti c environment.
When we were in circuit court we asserted that  and there was so me basis for her claim  because when the minerals were sold  about 1910  really interesting  by– the local owner  the owner was in Johnson County and he sold the mineral rights to a company in New York  that wanted to develop these minerals.
I went back to Selma for the thirtieth anniversary of the Selma  of the Voting Rights Act in 1995.
But starting in the early 70s I really worked -- in the 70s I bega n to represent the U.S. Government at UNESCO8 in human rights matters  then I ended up on the InterAmerican Court of Human Rights where we dea lt with some very nasty cases like disappearances and other things.
Now these were all guys that came out of the GI Bill of Rights.
When the Civil Rights movement was– he was paralyzed – from Texas  he took a bus to Washington  D.C. when they had the march.
There was an earlier case involving a voting rights march  I spen t a lot of time– there was a little community outside of Green wood named  called Itta Bena  Miss issippi.
Interview with Ruth Rappaport 51 October 14  2010 Did you  speaking about where you put your mouth and your money  during the civil rights era here in the United States because you obviously knew very well what happened in Europe when civil rights were being taken away  were you active here.
You know  the Civil Rights moved me  I followed it very closely.
And in 1970  I believe  I seem to remember in 1970 you began representing the U.S. government at the UNESCO in human rights matters.
24 Byron de la Beckwith (1921-2001) assassinated civil rights leader Medgar Evers on June 12  1963 in Jackson  Mississippi.
Well  here is a guy who has got First Amendment rights  he killed 160 people in in Oklahoma.
Always following the changes  I I thi nk they did the right thing  because the rights  no matter what who you are and what you are then and Martin Luther Interview with Bella Simon Pasternak October 22  1997 49King was killed  and all those things  I followed them.
And there was a difficult -- and I -- and I -- I -- it -- its amazing  I still do get them occasionally  I mean -- what right -- what rights did they have to arrest you?
They had the rights to go to Interview with Robert Max July 14  2015 53 the post exchange  where they could get cigarettes  candy  any anything that was available.
And in fact  I was just saying to the very friend whose phone just rang  how I remember so well all the Civil Rights marches.
And unless we keep constant vigilance  we are likely to lose those rights.
So the welfare rights groups came to me and we f iled some administrative complaints and basically threatened to close the thing down.
If there were eight civil rights lawyers in the Department and then you had John Doar  who was going down into the center of things and networking with the leaders?
We  my parents  had the right and privileges of German citizens which included of course all the civil rights.
And thats where I began  really  to get some practical experience in international human rights as a government re presentative.
Did you have anything to do with writing that legislation  the Voting Rights Act?
We had a course oh  oh and he talked about discrimination and about what must have been the first seedlings of the Civil Rights movement.
If I ever could do it  get the rights if my book was published  I would probably incorporate it  but I still so far have doubts about it.
Really  the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had been adopted in 48  but nothing much was happening.
There were firms in the South that were doing some civil rights litigation.
He was really the greater fighter in the inter-w ar years for Jewish rights in the Polish .
I just wonder  I have heard of anti-Semitism in the Black community that might have effected  for instance  Jewish Civil Rights workers  but I have not heard too much about USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0038 96 anti-Semitism in the anti-war movement.
When I went to  I told you I went to Israel last with Rabbis for human rights.
but this you know  this was the story of people who were deprived of their rights  just like you were deprived.
A Jew loss all his rights and therefore he was a person without rights.
Right  right  and who -- and who -- Do you think that that -- that may have been part of their understanding of -- Well  I think the Jewish people have alwa ys had a strong feeling about Civil Rights  and you know  being -- being an oppressed people fro m -- from way back  I mean  whether you go to Russia  and I mean  you know  the Russian -- the -- the Jewish people have been oppressed for -- for -- for -- for -- from -- from day one  actually.
And  you know  I have a little book fo r students on the teaching of -- on internationa l human rights  which actuall y the subject has suddenly taken on a life of it's own not only in law schools but ever y place else  which it didn't have when I first started in th is field in the late 60s.
I just was -- I just came to this country and I didnt have no views on the Civil Rights.
Ive -- as you know  I -- I was a judge on the inter-American court of human rights.
We were in Selma  we were in this case  th is voting rights case  this Dallas County case was a case  the first voting rights case under the 1965 Voting Rights Act  th at election.
So it -- in Latvia -- you will probably si -- hear it during the rest of my story  much of the time people still weren't sure wh-what -- what rights I had and what rights I-I didnt.
And the  excuse me  Institute had to deal with the Hitler heirs  to make sure there werent going to be problems about the rights  which they bought for a Interview with Gerhard Weinberg March 13  2012 60 few hundred marks from them.
And I -- I think its wonderful that I belong to an egalitarian shul where we were given complete rights and I can read Torah and Haftorah  I do that in memory of -- of my parents and I chant the Haftorah and privileged to ha -- ha -- Im happy to have the privilege to give -- to be given the opportunity where I could read Torah  because I remember we were not always egalitarian and when my mother died and I went to shul every day to say Kaddish  they didnt recognize me as part of the minyan and I fought it -- and we fought it and under our new rabbi  Rabbi Jonah Layman  he gave us full rights and I was very happy.
I dont I really dont think that there is a parallel to be drawn between what has happened here in the Civil Rights movement to what happened in Germany  there is no parallel.
Many times it is basically impossible to navigate through the legal system without having a lawyer to help you  so that poor people are often on the short end of business transactions and many other people lose rights.
So in terms of (you know) why citizenship was important  be having the GI Bill of Rights  10 months in the Service meant I had 2 years plus 10 months  which was a long way for college education.
Yeah  she was 60-something -- So -- -- and very active in Civil Rights  and very -- speaking every week  speaking every week  and I told her I would love for her to meet you and for you to meet her.
The st ates Mine Safety and Health Administration did not do a good job in protecting the rights of coal miners.
In other words  we gave these accused in these cases all the rights that a citizen would have had he been tried for a crime in the United States district courts or th e federal courts of this country.
Then also  some people  theyre fascinated  like for instance  Paletskis  or -- or Vanslovar  or Kemontite or Gregorouskas  or other people  they were fascinated by the official [indecipherable]  and they thought that even if we join the Soviet Union  we will still stay a Lithuanian republic  and we will have our national culture and rights.
I had actually been interested in being on the commi ssion  like -- the inter-American human rights system has a commission an d a court  and on the commission  the U.S. does have a representative.
And when we convened the first grand jury  there were some indictments about other case s  not involving the three civil rights workers  because there was not yet any clear confession to who had done that or what had happened.
My dad died on the train because he was di abetic and he didn't have any shots and by all rights I think the Naxis shoul d have let her go  but they didn't.
An important cultural or political event  or a movement  the Civil Rights Movement.
And we had  one of my classmates is now  whos now the Chancellor of North Carolina Central  was an African-American named Julius Chambers  who became a very prominent civil rights lawyer.
I mean  he doesn't have th-the rights or anything  I -- I have the rights  but I-I didn't try  even.
When would you say you began to deve lop a philosophy of human rights law and that you saw that emerge in your ideals in the kinds of choices you were making and the cases you were bringing?
So I was in fact  my one attempt at politics was among the physicists was to propose a   that we boycott those states that are not supporting the Equal Rights Amendment cause it was 40 years ago.
He did not understand that girls have you know rights and thoughts of their own.
The Civil Rights movement was going on in this country  when black people were trying to win their equal rights.
If you want democracy to thrive  know your rights and use them judiciously .
It wasnt long after that  that -- that there were a lot of civil rights issues going on.
Because that was another part of this whole civil rights strugg le  was they were using literacy tests at the time.
For several years  Michel has served as Commissioner of Human Rights in Fairfax County  Virginia.
Uh here as a foreword I uh indicated what rights the people had  specifically  they did not have to return to the countries from which they came though they were being compelled to return.
Who is the principal and what are the rights of the students and what are -- what you cannot do and what you shouldnt do -- what is expected of you.
They killed some of their families and that they had no rights anymore.
With  you know  with Civil Rights and everything else that came -- that came do wn the pike with the democratic party.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0035 56 I -- I want to -- theres a -- a whole list of events and I want to go back to the Civil Rights movement that there are several things that the Oral History department has put down that I think I want you to look at and see if theres any -- anything there that you in particular had experience.
Well  in Europe  most of the time the Jews had no rights.
I think it was easy  he would be the first  among others  he would sa y  ﬁWell they should be  certainly not prevent people ﬂ think it was wrong to try to enforce the right to vote or even the right to go to public facilities or to have the same legal rights as everyone else.
And she said to me  I says  youre very talented in arts  I used to paint  I used to draw  I used to do all kinds of things  she says  why dont you take a course under the G.I. Bill of Rights.
No body was interested in this field and in the international -- the American Society of International -- didn't even consider human rights to be a subject of international -- so I worked in bo th of these areas and I thought it was always very impo rtant.
Im kind of -- so the black civil rights mo vement for me meant that I supported it by wherever I could by -- for instance in our temple  that we had in Interview with Wolfgang Price 39 May 2  2014 Washington  DC.
And I -- I ha -- you know  I -- I believed then one of the reason I treasured article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  was free dom of expression  which I still believe is one of civilization highest achievement.
I'm still reading it but that was the main reason I gave up the Human Rights Commission.
Do you feel that you  who lived through times when your rights were take n away  and your parents and everybody else  that you have a more -- a bigger se nsitivity to people whose rights have not been addressed.
What can happen -- what actually can happen when the rights are being taken away  and how important democratic governments are  and how important that people can have their say.
Yeah  because they used to come to Naches on weekends with their airplane and they would help the people  you know  prepare them too for for their rights.
We represented a lot of people in everyday problems with family law  consumer rights   housing problems.
And then there was a small group here in Eastern Kentucky of lawyers  who had worked as a group called Mountain Peoples Rights.
They promulgated very stringent laws taking away the uh the basic rights of people uh and uh then I came to the conclusion that most probably to continue studies at the University for law or of law uh would uh would not guarantee me any future.
And he was very interested in equality  and in everybody having the same rights.
And because she was in Garmisch  uh  before the war ended  so she had a rights to to be considered as a...as a person with permanent resident in Garmisch.
Before we come to that  you mentioned that all his rights were taken away.
But in a general term  I must tell you  I was always  and will always be vocal for the rights -- be -- whichever it -- way it is.
You know  we had to duck  you know  in case there were no rights  and I grabbed the soldier  I don't know maybe he was Gestapo  and I said see I'm telling you the truth in German.
Is there anything in particular that you woul d like to say because something has come to a conclusion in the way you -- in your philosop hy of international rights  or -- or human rights  that you have taken a new direction  or just someth ing  anything that comes to mind that you might want to -- No  what comes to mind  less dramatic  is the fact that it -- there seems to be some sort of poetry -- not poetic justice  but a certain justice that has poetic  or non-legal aspect to Interview with Thomas Buergenthal February 27  2001 58it.
Cold War and Im just wondering how you saw th at and then also I know there were so many issues going on about civil rights for African-Ame ricans.
I remember studying for it  and learning the you know  gosh A2: Bill of Rights?
Did she No we never had like sit down and try memorize reminisc encing or trying to figure out why things took the turn where they did bec ause there People were behaving the way we army and other -- there were other anti -German organ izations in Poland which were not only linked to the Polish government i which represented Poland and having rights to say something on behalf of Polish nation.
What they didnt realize is that in the long run human rights education is much more dangerous to them than some more advocacy oriented course  because if you begin to teach children about -- that they have rights  that can have an impact.
Interview with Susanne K. Bennet 65 Were you active in the civil rights movement?
And the Jewish people were very gr ateful to the -- to Franz Joseph  I believe  who came out in 1848  with some rights for the Jews.
For nearly 10 years Michel has been serving as a Commissioner of Human Rights in Fairfax County  Virginia.
I dont know that I ever felt depressed  I think most of us  and at the time this was a pretty highly motivated group of lawyers  who worked in the Civil Rights Division.
So they all withdrew because it was no -- it was no freedom  it was no rights   it was all German propaganda  so they all withdrew.
It makes sense.ﬂ I said  ﬁWhat - what rights do you have with your beard  and your funny little thing over here to say those things?
But the lessons that we get from it is that we basically have to defend our hard -earned rights.
And I -- I used to teach a seminar every year on international human rights  and one part of the seminar dealt with the inter-American system.
That people have to be honest and have to say what they think and have to stand up and marc h for their rights.
Q. Now  you were describing that after Warsaw was occupied  little by little the Germans were taking away your rights and they had help from the Ukrainians.
Very often  communists in their profidious manipulation of the records and...and the law would leave the title and people  but would so restrict the rights of the owners or the ...uh...benefits that owners would derive from ownership of the property that for all intents and purposes  these people had all the burdens without any benefits.
Here you lived in a country that deprived you of your civil rights.
And all three of them married Civil Rights Division lawyers within a year of each other.
Yeah  the Civil Rights Mo -- yeah  you know what played a -- a bigger part in my life?
I've always thought that I could be much more effectiv e in the human rights area by not being an activist in the sense of being a lawyer f iling cases  but an academic who could be perceived to have a legitimacy when he spoke on human rights issue that wasn't driven by political considerations.
And I would in every seminar say what a pity it was that the U.S. had not ratified the Amer ican convention on human rights  because it meant that an American w ould never sit on the inter-American court of human rights.
You know  when you think about  you know  what went on  the  you know  the Cold War and  and  and the Soviet Union  McCarthyism  Civil Rights  the Eichmann trial  anything?
Everybody who was anybody who had any rights to anything was there.
And its amazing how you can apply this formula to all kinds of completely different things  as I have just done  and I can go beyond that  it is in in the ci Civil Rights Movement  which I embraced w ith great enthusiasm  having just been through six years of war to f to fight against racism.
That you all of a sudden lost all of your civil rights.
And they they didnt go into the prison camps  but they hid  because they were afraid that they would not be treated when the last day of the uprising  the Germans decided that they would treat us as combatants  and give us Geneva rights.
If the African Americans are not having  or the Black community do not have the same rights as I  as a white person who is Jewish -- they dont have the rights  I dont have my right.
And thats what brought me to the United States  because the American school did not have rights in Brazil   so I could not have gone on to to a university or anything.
We filed the suit under the Voting Rights Act  in order to have those votes counted as they ought to be counted  so that their right to vote was protected and their vote would be counted.
Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
And I think the civil rights  I think in a lot of these struggles  things like whether its the Wall coming down or whatever it is  someone  it always seems to take an incident like the civil rights workers death32 to wake people up  unfortunately.
Were you following the -- that -- those issues closely  in the 60s  when the Civil Rights movement was happening a nd -- and the controversies -- Oh  sure. --
Interview with Vera Levine 43 February 7  2013 Were you active in the civil rights movement at all in the 60s and 70s?
You may not know it but the German SS did not believe very much in Miranda rights.
You were in America for the civil rights movement  McCarthy era  Cold War  Vietnam War  womens movement  etc.
I stay home  I read hist -- American history or the Bill of Rights  I dont go to work on that day.
Were you aware of some of the events in the Civil Rights movement when you first came here?
So you think it -- it could have backslid back towards slavery or something like that  if it hadnt -- without the Civil Rights movement?
The Bill of Rights is the most motivating fact or  for this immigrant  as I ever seen.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 7 We were residents without any legal rights to vote  to participate  nothing.
This race was the first primary election held after the passage of the Voting Rights Act.
I loved people  but Amalie Salsitz was also fighter  because she was the middle child  so she fought for her rights  because my older sister was only year and a half older than I  and the younger  one year younger.
When you think that Germany and France could get together after the second World War  and create this union with this purpose  and the European and human rights  of course  the mo -- the emphasis on the European c-convention  and international law  the UN.
I me -- maybe the Civil Rights movement  or McCarthyism  or anythi ng that you can think of?
It was also a difficult time because at the national level  President Nixon had an Office of Economic Oppor tunity Director  who was opposed to legal services  bringing any of these sort of controversial cases against public officials  and challenging welfare rights practices and that sort of thing.
Rule that a final judgment rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction on the merits is c onclusive as to the rights of the parties and their privies  and  as to them  constitutes an absolute bar to a subsequent action involving the same claim  demand  or cause of action.ﬂ Henry Campell Black  M.A. Blacks Law Dictionary (St. Paul: West Publishing Co.  1983) s.v.
And -- and there -- a --a citizen has different rights than an alien  obviously.
I think everybody should have civil rights and have th e freedom to do and work in a manner that America was envisioned.
Just wasnt for me cause it didnt involve dealing with people  and protecting victims rights.
Because they claimed that mi neral ownership rights had been established by these series of Kentucky cases in the Supreme Court over the y ears and that people when they bought mineral rights expected to be able to legally surface mine.
And now -- now I work mostly with the Holocaust Human Rights Center of Maine.
And then he...he...uh...he...uh... actually took all the rights and all the...the...what the ghetto community had to do  the Committee was absolu tely powerless.
During the 60s and 70s with the civil rights movement here in the United States Yes.
As a matter of fact  when in Germany  I was the youngest member of the [indecipherabl e] for Human Rights.
They are here for a reason  they ar e human beings  and just like anyone else in America  they came in by the same rights.
So I am very proud - I dont know what my grandparents are thinking about it  but I -- Im very happy that we have equal rights  cause they were all Orthodox.
People who promote human rights  when they politicize the subject  do a great deal of harm to the victims because they then debilitate themselves in being able to protect victims.
I know that there were lots of Jewish young people who were in volved in the Civil Rights movement.
Th en Koga Koola lived  Koga Kooza fe ll and we continued to work a se cond great  second great engineers  always  always just with smaller  smaller pay an d less rights than the other  the other engineers.
I feel it is part of me  but still  my country is the U.S.A. Were you active in the Civil Rights movement  or ve well  because you lived in a country where peoples civil rights were denied?
So really  my work is again about human rights  and the care of th e individual  and the individuals family.
Were you involved in a ny way in the civil rights mo vement because you came from a country that deprived many people of their civil rights  did you respond to that?
And then came -- Because you know  I -- I think what is -- what is so often lost to the United States  we have as a country so much to offer in this field  in terms of our experience with -- with human rights  with civil rights  and -- and with the court system over the fact that these issues are litigated in courts  that -- that they are not fought on in the streets.
But they were very  I think they were very impressed by and large with the lawyers and associates that I me t in the Civil Rights Division.
And they took over and it...all the rights were taken away immediately  the first day the German troops entered the city of Lodz.
On the other hand  the -- the civil rights -- I mean  I was shocked when I came to America that you s -- one still had separate fountains and all of that.
but its a statement of my mother  that she had to sign  that she waives and surrenders any rights and claims of demands of any blah-blah-blah  whatever.
And then in the early 50s  the European Convention on Human Rights came into being.
The only tr ains that went back to Poland were the Russian convoys  with the rush -- Russian nationals  becau se there was a secret agreement at Yalta between the heads of states  that all the western heads of states relinquish the rights to Russian nationals  and will turn them over to the -- to the Russian authorities.
44 Can you explain to me how  or what it was then  that made you say  I will never get involved in politics  but I will get involved in issues of human rights?
To be treated in your country  duties  rights  like you  Interview with Jacob Wiener October 25  1998 29the same.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0007 67 67was probably the Voting Rights Act of ‚67  after Selma.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0030 9 -- where they stayed  I wondered  just jumping way into the future  did you have a -- make a connection with the Civil Rights moveme nt at all  or the story of slavery in America?
I mean  one of the othe r last things beside the Kent State thing that I did at the Civil Rights Division was to  you know after these folks were convicted  then they appealed their conviction and it went on.
Yes  Im very much in favor of the Civil Rights movement  not that I personally was active in it  of course  but I have a lot of sympathy for it.
I guess I didnt mean it quite so crudely  I was just thinking a strong emphasis on individual rights  for instance  tends to be a pa rt of -- of the outlook of the -- this country  but -- Interview with Thomas Buergenthal February 27  2001 45 But a -- but I think  in my case  the -- the cr -- the commitment to individual rights is probably less influenced by America as much as by my own expe rience.
I think it's very important for NGOs 9 and activist organizations to do the work that they're doing  but it's also important for pe ople to be seen as committed to human rights and committed to the advancement of human right s who aren't political activists in the field.
Interview with Regine Ginsberg 54 Were you active in any way when the civil rights movement began?
Yes  it -- it was around in the early 1970s   that I -- I was teaching -- at that point I was still teaching at Buffalo  at the state university of New York   and one of the lawyers in town who became a good friend of mine was -- received a political appointment to serve on the U.S. delegation to the UN Human Rights Commission.
Now uh then one evening when I was doing this work  the man who was in charge of that relief operation came to me and said  listen  I have just received a call from the head of the uh central organization of Jews...the name was the of Jews from Germany  which means the representative of the rights of Jews in Germany...his name was Otto Hirsch .
And because of my background  a nd because of the background of my colleague  it seemed very appropriate that we should link to something that sounded as constructive as an Israeli and Palestinian Formation for the Benef it of Human Rights.
You were a reluctant teacher at first  but then you became quite an inspired teacher in terms of trying to get the two fields that you had chosen  internati onal law  and human rights -- international human rights law incorporated  or strengthene d in the curricula and so on.
I was with the Anti-Trust Division probably  maybe a month or two a nd then I went to work for the Civil Rights Division.
And since New Years of 1983  Ive worked exclusively in child neglect  child abuse and termination of parental rights litigation.
And we did all this document preparation  I mean there would be several  even had a footlocker full of voting rights records.
I mean I worked with a man  a lawyer in the Civil Rights Division  who came from Fort Smith  Ar kansas and he started trying to be  I mean he was speaking out and the next thing he knew  he had no law practice left and he was in Washington  D.C. So  its more easily said than done  but when you think about the history of the persecution in the  that the Jews have had  and the Holocaust and all of the things that are behind us  you– that theyve gone through  you would have hoped that Jews would have been more sympathetic to the situation that blacks f aced every day.
What was your -- what was your view on what was going on with the civil rights movement and sit ins and -- Its a way to fight to get what you want  I guess.
And I -- I really dont feel at this point  that the g overnment should be requiring as a matter of law  or -- or monetarily subsidizing those who a-are not willing to exercise the rights and opportunities available to them.
But the claims had to be submitted to a German agency  and if you were not satisfied with that you had again to go through the German judicial system up to the German supreme court and German constitutional court and th e United Restitution Organization which was another organization I was involved when it was set up and I was the director of that  we took many cases to the German Supreme Court a nd had to take them to constitutional court to assert our rights.
And I think people sh ouldn't be in human rights if they don't have some empathy for what it is to be subjected to violations.
I mean the -- the country is going through starting to look at civil rights issues and discrimination -- Not at that point.
I have a frien d of mine here who -- again I wont name  who talks about he doesnt have to learn abou t the civil rights struggle  of which he was USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0072 67both a victim and a winner  he just has to reme mber it.
And so that was -- but the Civil Rights moveme nt is another -- was another thing.
During the civil rights movement in the 60s and the 70s here in the United States  do you feel that you were more attuned to it because you had lived in a country which deprived you of your civil rights?
The reason Im asking is Im interested in your awareness of the Civil Rights movement developments and whether you were aware of or pa rticularly interested in what went on with Brown versus the Board of Education.
You had mentioned about  you were active in the rights for the deaf  civil rights for the deaf.
And I think Julius Chambers we nt to Charlotte  I think we had some very serious discussions about civil rights work.
Do you feel that you were so active in doing that because of your background and you had been a child in a country that deprived people of their civil rights.
And you know  in 1964 you had the killing of the three civil rights workers around that very thing.
And that we have  that free speech is important and that all of the guarantees that we have under the Constitution a nd under the Bill of Rights are very meaningful and that its important to talk about them.
To be treated in this country  rights  like you  the same.
The Bund was not in favor of building a home in Israel  the Bund was in favor of establishing our presence  and our life  and our privileges in Poland  in th -- Lithuania  in Czechoslovakia  and they played a major role  because they did more than -- than -- than expressed -- you know formulated  you know  ad -- and advocated the policy of fighting for our rights.
And it was disaster  and you you were unable to do anything  you know  thats those people who were free had all the rights.
That way he actually didnt know what is going on  but it sounds -- you know  the committee of human rights sounds -- and I told him  okay  you dont sign  I -- from your office  Im calling to this  and I took receiver from his phone [indecipherable] right away.
In America the civil rights are not taken away completely .
After all  you lived in a country where the civil rights were taken away.
Were you active in the civil rights movement lets say in the 60s and 70s because Are you kidding.
And in those days it was easier to talk about human rights education  because it was not seen by many of the dictatorial governments as being threatening.
My civil rights movement is the fact that for years and years and hopefully much longer  anywhere and ever y place I get up and I speak about the Holocaust.
Because the whites– the Bureau in those earlier days was not  made it pretty plain  I think  that they were not sympathetic to the civil rights struggle  or some of them did.
I mean t  were you active in the Civil Rights movement in the United States  because you had lived in a country that deprived others of civil rights.
Were you in any way active in the Civil Rights movement here in the 60s and 70s?
Do you remember during the Civil Rights era  for example  were you particularly aware of what was happening with the struggle of -- of the Blacks to -- to have equal rights?
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0007 50 50 And at what point did you realize that you wanted to do civil rights work?
Served as First Assistant and then Assistan t Attorney General  Civil Rights Division  Department of Justice  from 1960 to 1967.
They may not be able to run those black market operations  but their rights were being protected.
Just as regrettable as it was that it took so long to get to the days of the civil rights  it took– Brown against the Board of Education is 1954 and we arent fully at the end of it yet  with regard to higher education.
And the vision was to combine human rights  and the care of the victims.
Well  he was hoping  like many of the others in the higher bourgeoisie that Hitler could be very useful safeguarding the rights of the higher bourgeoisie to exempt higher status -- So whatever crimes might have been commi tted were not -- either they weren't necessarily crimes  or they were necessary crimes.
To me  this is so important that every human being has to have the same rights.
And that cr eated a certain degree of public pressure  in part from Jewish groups  and survivor groups  which unlike 1945 - 1950  where they were immigrants with no -- no confidence to say what they wanted  and no strong desire to relive the immediate past as opposed to dea ling with creating a new life and a future  were now established U.S. citizens  quite conscious and aware of their rights to lobby congressmen  to get some results on this.
Its a little bit like the Civil Rights Division  fairly small family.
And the chain d ecided they would comply with the civil rights laws and they were going to let blacks go to the movies  because they had always been upstairs.
I had voting rights  which was very unusual as a woman.
But we were restricted in  your rights  you know  lik e in normal times I would still take the letter to the post office  but you know  you cant take cant leave the house.
That course I took was under th-the G.I. Bill of Rights.
And those rights could be privilege given by any government  political party  religious groups.
I mean  in the 60s  the Civil Rights movement  later the Feminist movement -- is there anything that affected you in particular  that was important to you  that reverberated in a special way?
And in the 20s he left Romania and renounced his rights to the family and to the throne and to everything concer ning Romania.
And Interview with Al fred Lakritz April 3  2008 148I asked attorneys for a Jewish  so forth  t-to advise me as to whether not we had rights.
Interview with Wies 25 August 15  2018 My mother  call today human rights activist.
But what I was able to do and throughout my life  my professional life  is that I never Thomas Buergenthal 60 November 28  1995 Page 60 just did  I was never just an academic  th at I wrote and taught international law  particularly human rights and internationa l organizations.
But in between I got very much in terested in human rights and I wrote one of my first articles on human rights.
Then Jews began to lose their citizenship rights  and they were no longer  for example  allowed to teach in the universities.
So they sign -- signed aw ay some of the rights that we might have had and I think that was a mistake  in a sens e  because sooner or later  we would grow up and we did grow up and we do question these things and -- and we feel that we have a responsibility to our past and therefore to the future.
19 Burke Marshall: Assistant Attorney Gene ral  US Department of Justice  Civil Rights Division  from 1961-1964.
