Because at first the Hungarian government said we were citizens and they didn't want to give us up   but then  even though they didn't like us and they mistreated us  however they felt that we still belonged there.
Some Jews consider 01:12 themselves Czechs  but as I told you they would have considered themselves Czechs but they were really not accepted by the Czechs.
And in this case  what really happened was that the -- these people would meet periodically to discuss the problems of the occupation  and one day a Jewish woman from Salonica told him what was happening  and the poet [indecipherable] Yanosh wrote the appeal  it was signed immediately by all 42  and it was delivered to the Germans  and to the government of Greece.
And in that parade the entire Polish government formed in Moscow plus Marshal Orkorsowski and some Soviet generals were supposed to on the tribune receiving the parade of all the Polish troops  which were ready to go into battle.
Neither they  or any of the o fficials  very high officials  I mean  you know  third level subcabinet officers  and the the U.S. government  under Henry Interview with Joseph Eaton August 1  2010 26Wallace had begun cooperative farms by purcha sing large plantations that were going bankrupt  especially in the south  and then hiring farm managers and recruiting impoverished farm laborers  put them on the land.
And due to this finding  I finally got  a month later  operation from the German government for gesundheit sharden.
Because he was a Polish citizen  you might say  in Poland became a communist country so they allowed all the Polish citizen to go back to Poland.
They were fiercely opposed to the Russian government for years and years and there was no such thing as Poland being willingly in the satellite orbit.
I had to start in a Polish school and learn Polish and all the subjects were in Polish.
And the Nazi government didn't have a representative in the Span ish government and they wanted one  and I understood that they wanted one.
But it was still part was Hungary and part of was Czechoslovakia at that time.
But the Hungarian government unfortunately never took responsibility and there is a revisionist history today in Hungary which tried to describe that we were victims  the Hungarians were victims of the Nazis as much as everybody else.
It was the policy at that time for the Army to move forward as fast as it can and not try to destroy all the Germans as we go but bypass them and let the infantry come in and finish up the work that we started.
And one day a German woman approached the baby carriage and my mother's heart almost stopped because she knew she wasn't supposed to be there.
My brother was high up in the American government  and his daught er one daughter was in charge of communications for the Library of Congress.
And then I stayed with an English family that took I think they were paid by the government.
>> Gideon Frieder: In 1942  the Slovak government did a census of the J ews.
One of the big problems of the War Refugee Board was th at the government gave them no money.
They were then consolidated from all these units in the fi eld and issue  as a report  an issue to all the highest echelons of German government  those w ho said they'd never heard of it and didn't know -- the Foreign Office  the Finance Ministry  all the ministries were getting copies of these reports.
The French government passed a law immediately anybody who comes back must get their apartment back.
If it's Katya's idea... I: Wait a minute  [speak s foreign language here] [speaks foreign language here] I: Look  there is an existing  an existing standardized  existing standardized layout for a concentration camp indoor  indoor establishment an d  and so  so  it isn't st andardized policy  we need where we need that  we need that.
In fact  it was the Soviets who after even the establishment of the very pro-Allied government in Bulgaria by September fifth of 1944  they declared war on Bulgaria for political reasons.
And then  you know  they...the other  the Antonescu government  you know  he took the power.
Why  I didnt know  because did you know actually in Zhmerinka  the only two people we re -- were killed is -- one was a high -- he had a high position in the -- in Zhmerinka lo -- in the -- you know  in this local government  and anoth -- the second one was my grandfather  who was actually [indecipherable] person  and he was deprived of any business when co-collectivization started in Russia.
A normal assignment is three years  or two years  we had extended  and Ive been re-selected by -- by the city government  which of -- whi -- there are seven councilors  and -- plus the mayor.
No  it was the only no  this apparently is something that that was designed to let the ge Nazi government know that the Jewish community in Berlin was sub sa was substantial  it was well-endowed  and that it was historically been there forever.
And I said  \ No  we educate our children ourselves.ﬂ And then in the end  they agreed but said that they'd only take our children if the government is in agreement.
Uh...I also was registered in Berlin to go on a transport direct to Israel2 on Aliyah  but unfortunately  as it turned out that phone call never came and the...uh...letter for Israel never came either because in June 1939  we got the call from the Polish government to come and pick up the...the stamp...that we are able to leave Berlin.
So we were we still in Vilnius were in midst of the Lithuanian community there  which was very small  and really oppressed  but they were prou d because they felt that they were oppressed  and they were right that there was something wrong  you know  with the Polish government  that they they were oppressing the Lithuanians anyways.
And Lithuania was a fascist government under the rule of President Smetona.
Where the money went  what's the Red Cross from Switzerland and Jewish organizations was donated  I don't want to know  I don't want to be in it  the history is written by Israeli government  let' s somebody who wants to find out exactly what happened  they can find out with ---------------.
The government was not very friendly toward the Jewish returnees  if you will.
If you didn't pay your tax to the Jewish community  the tax of the government taxed your property.
That this man who was the Head of the Jewish Agency for Palestine  the Head of the umb the umb Government of the Jews  uh the substitute break government was there in Zeilshyme????
Tell us  Hungary was a very close ally of Nazi Germany.
And in Denmark it was the official policy of the king  and people just followed it wonderfully  and people were saved.
Yes  I did have passports to give  but if if the question became known and the Spanish government found out that that the passport had been given to a Nazi minister  the Spanish government undoubtedly would have reacted  and they undoubtedly would have said no  we uh do not authorize this.
In my  in 1937  at the end of 1937  when I was employed in a private engineering firm  the the government  the embassy made the govern ment came to power  K ovan Kuza and our company gave us every mont hs by the end of the month a note that this is our last month of work and say on January 1  38 I got a note that  that my employment will end January 31 st  38.
Oh  isn't that funny -- you grow -- But the thing they want me to do was get -- was be an interface with the government  on government-type contracts.
And when I used to work in the engineering stuff  why wed be on government proposals.
It was always a government town  it was a trading town.
I worked hard  and I -- Im glad Im not dependent on USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 33 German government because I came out sick for the rest of my life  and get a small pension.
And then the Lichenstein government told us in confidence  \ Look here.
And after the communists came  did you notice any anti-Semitism  either within the government or just around you?
I should authorize them to take revenge on the Nazis and throw the Colonel out of power and come in with my own troops  put the Colonel out of commission and declare a social democratic government here in .
Did you ever feel anti-Semitism at that time in -- in America?
His name  I think was Sa kura  who took good care of us when we arrived in Spain and was responsible for taking us from Spain to Morocco  because the agreement with the Spanish government was that only a certain am ount of Jews will be allowed to stay in Spain  and in order to accept new Jews  they had to leave.
And I arranged there to talk to German kids in the school  about the Holocaust and they were treated from the German government to -- they paid for their hotel and the entertainment.
So then  what did upset me about my brother  because they didnt no the government didnt notify me  which they should have.
You know  almost all these people would have been perfectly satisfied to beco me employees of the  of the government in their former own place of work.
You know  they took a lot of people in  local people  local me -- ma -- people who had their own -- they had th eir own tailoring business  but figured they dont want to be in private -- be private  they want to be employed by the government -- Right. --
But you know that in 1943  August there was a clash between the Danes and the German interest and to put it shortly the Danes resigned and the Danish Government retired and the Parliament went home the King went into exil e in his castle and the Shee which has protected us from German encroachment was removed overnight.
So this minister said a friendly governme nt like the Spanish 25 government would do such a thing?
But two years later  in 1940  by decree of government  all Jewish children were expelled from state schools.
A lot of people ca-came from all over and they didnt have jobs and the government stil -- wasnt prepared for that.
Now people should know that Toppensohn who built the crematorium of Auschwitz was from Erfurt and if you don't know the histor y actually  that Toppensohn had the same problem that all contractors have with Government  that it didn't work right in the first place.
The [indecipherable] publications in Germany released all the government news  and it was only news when -- the news was only what the Nazis wanted you to read.
When Hitler came along  they became Nazis and kept their government jobs.
How can we pr epare for trial?ﬂ And she said to me  ﬁI don't think you people would know how to use these docum ents ﬂ you know  in connection with the business of how this youn g woman was treated over in government  you know.
32 WZ: Well  number one  you had to be able to indicate that these people were involved and importantly involved in making policy and in thei r functioning together wi th the Hitler people  together with Goering  who wa s in charge of the  not the four year plan  what was it?
The war finished  only when all was finished; then we heard something to know from the government.
Th e Jewish government make me a little booth outside - outside - a toilet - a whole  with a douche - outside.
I knew more or less what the Polish government policy was with the Jewish people  force us out of pos itions  business positions.
And a pa -- and Polish  I went to the Polish school .
So its a provisional government di rective  not a German directive?
And then we knew  yeah  well the -- well  the Germans had -- well  they were just put to -- to work in Germany  so we didnt think much of it  that they would be killed  we didnt know about that.
So a-and of course   schools are already set Poli Polish government in exile again  I mean  I dont know how they did it  but they set up schools right there.
This was within the power of the Slovakian government just as it had been a Slovakian government initiative to get the transports going in the first place.
And also  the government was a little uncomfortable  and they started to distance themself from it.
For instance  I didnt know  and my colleagues  we didnt know that the Germans are bent to kill all of us.
And when I circulated  I had the Companion de France uniform and ID  so that I could take a train anywhere and also not have to pay with my ID  because I was part of the Vichy government Companion de France.
And of course from that time I was - you know  I didnt believe exists a -- a civil government forever -- fo -- fo -- from -- from this particular time.
82 And all of the li -- the laws that followed  a nd they were not one time pieces of legislation  there was a first compensation law  and there wa s an amended compensation law  and there was subsequently the regulations  and there was a property restitution law  Germany  on top of the military government restitution law for a certain type of assets which were not covered by the initial legislation.
He got his  you know  degree here in Chicago   moved to Toronto for his post-doctoral work  then his fam moved with his family to New York for a number of years  and then to D.C. to work for the government.
Fi rst they took them -- first they took  on the very beginning  a very large group as hostages  and I remember members of the Judenrat or members of the Jewish government  what you would call  walking around from place to place trying to collect gold coins  gold rings  and so on  because there was a quota how much they had to  to give the Germans to save the lives of the group of what you would call the intelligentsia  the in tellectuals; people that were worth taking hostage because they would take hostages from the street.
So I cant tell you though  how the news that the Polish government was sending emissaries  or representatives to try trying to find us  I dont know how we got the news.
After Horthy changed the government  things started to be a little easier.
But as the military people in the summer of '44 came to us and said they would acknowledge us as the underground government and obey us.
And let me explain myself  he did not respond with my question it was  that he had no business mingling in with the Polish government  because he is only the head of this museum  he is not a re -- he is not in Madelines Albrights position  hes not -- you know I mean  the Secretary of State  to speak to a foreign about the [indecipherable] in Auschwitz  and so on  which it was over there.
Now at that time  the immigration policy was that you had to have first papers  a nd after first papers you have to wait five years and you can make an application to become a citizen.
WZ: I was eager to go to Nure mberg because and not only eager to go to Nuremberg  but eager to work on an I. G. Fa rben trial  because I'd had contact w ith it in my work at the Board of Economic Welfare before I got into the Arm y. I was I think being Jewish certainly had something to do with my eagerness to go there and since I had really been out for well over somewhere between four and six years  I had no law practice to go back to and I was interested in going to federal government agai n  and this seemed the pl ace to do it and to do  be part of the prosecution.
They were issued by the consulate the Bolivian consulate in Zurich   which they were not issued by the government of Bolivia.
They came back because my parents  many people around spoke about them very highly  positively  and they wrote to the Russian government that they were not for Bourgeois who exploit othe r people.
Because of the way the French government was going to protect me  one way or the other.
And when you speak of the government  I dont mean to be [indecipherable] The Austrian government  the Austrian governme nt.
And from what I'd been read -- what I read -- it was part of the government in power at that time  and he said this is a mistake because they have to go by boat.
It never was any  anything  any pogroms sanctioned by the Polish government.
And they took a group of kids that the French government okayed it a nd they took us to France.
And same way  they had to -- the German government was forced to supply the best foods.
And  naturally  when the war was over  the uh British government was obligated to bring everybody who wanted to back to Cyprus.
And that was integrated and that was our schools that was the government  city  you know?
In the beginning they still kept their farms but  I understand that later on they had to give up their farms to the Russian government and work with them as co-hosts whatever they established at that point.
The new democratic government of Czechoslovakia proclaimed that we are not longer Czech citizenship -- citizens.
They said  you know  the Yad Vashem -- they built -- the government actually supporting it.
And that is an interesting thing  that was happen in summer  and in December  this our major  who was already formally with us  and the chief editor get letter that they should report in American government occupied forces in Wiesbaden   not far from where we live.
D-Do you see those two in -- in contrast  or are you talking about what was going on in Israel  with -- with the Israeli government constantly reminding you as a way of bonding you together?
Shortly after Hitler came to power in 1933  I think your father lost his business.
When we got there  there was no government at al l yet.
Every Jew got a quota of ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 10 how much he had to contribute to the German government as punishment for the as sassination of the German embassy official in Paris.
As a matter of fact I have proof and I'm in the middle of a fight with the Czech government about it.
Even if I know {286}  only the Jews know German and the Germans who lived in Poland.
It was a very exciting time  to find people who could help the U.S. government become a new family of weapons.
And after I was through with the year of elementary school  I went to a Jewish secondary school.
That would be nice  and but again  like I was saying about a- Interview with Peter Masters September 25  1998 80about progress in government  I you mustnt accept the notion that because the ultimate has been achieved  that it will therefore stay in in even in its in its degree of quality.
And once they ran out of them  also the Jewish people came in and there were there were Interview with Algimantas Gureckas October 14  2010 112more of them  l-lot I I dont know pe rcentage-wise in numbers wouldnt be more  but percentage-wise definitely there were more Jewish collaborators than Lithuanian collaborators with the Soviet government.
So after 24 hours  then the secretary died  and during the time the government organized Buchenwald  what was later called Kristallnacht.
I must uh say that in the month of August  had fired the Nazi government a nd one of the first measures that was taken was that the star be no longer worn a nd all the racial laws were being dismantled and brought down  and so many people went back to the villages where they had lived.
But  again  a critical history  the Communist government wanted to show that  no  they are not discriminating and my class of 13  of among the people  boys  12 of us  we were accepted.
He spoke fluently Slovak  German  Hungarian  the major languages spoken in that part of the country so he was therefore the interface to the government.
but I was just wondering We removed them from office in important jobs like in the government and in important jobs  administrative jobs and we removed thousands.
That were set up by the joint distribution  and run by the United States ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 19 government.
And when I lived in Czechoslovakia for a short time after the war  there was no o-organized synagogue or anything that I recall a-at the time  and the government or the -- basically the whole population in general in Czechoslovakia was not exactly a religious type of country like in some countries.
The Hungarian government  since 1943  were in secret negotiations with the Russians and the English to get out of the war.
To -- to -- you have to have permission  government permission to move from this apartment to -- government permission to -- for to move from one apartmen t on.
Say look  I am in a official government position here  this medical position  and I am not afraid of a lawyer.
And yet  the very same purchasing agents of the very same government agencies who were placing the orders  refused to deal with the pure Lithuanian Christian employees  and they dealt only with me.
Only our determination and our willingness to fight and not wait for the goodwill of the English government  is the only solution.
And to go to Romania from Poland you needed passports by then  you needed visa s  you needed foreign currency  it was both the Polish government and th e Romanian govern ment made it very difficult.
But that was really seldom that a Jew got a professorship.
Jews were something which the Nazis detested and wanted to eliminate.
I want her to have everything  but I don't want you to take that because if the German government finds out  they might have a record of everything.
Daddy was in Moscow on orders for the Soviet government because he was in charge of a -- five co-operatives  a leather co-operative for making boots  a candy co-ope rative  a where you make flour  a flour mill  he was in charge of a bakery  and he had gone to Moscow to make all proper arrangements for what he needed for that thing.
If you had radio  first of all  it was taken from the government.
So  so my work there in military government was  was highly respected.
I did not -- I was a Canadian citizen for a long period of time and then when I started to critique the government  I was told I better take out citizenship.
I stayed with them in Ako and there was their cousin -- my Uncle Shaloms cousin  I think and his wife  who had the little place also in Ako  but it was not in the town  it was kind of out of town  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0028 55 where the government built places to live.
Do you know if you went to Mexico if the Mexican government knew that you were Jewish when you were getting your visas  or if you were just traveling at The Mexican the Mexican government at the time was fairly liberal  and it was fairly liberal this was the time of Lazaro Cardenas .
Up to this da te  Im fighting the Polish government to recover the property which is still in Poland in Birkenau to get my property   the owner.
Uh but so we decided to go back 8 to our unit about uh six  eight miles away from there  and it was getting dark  so when we got back uh I compared notes with the uh military government colonel and he told me that in fact they uh had come across a group of about a hundred twenty uh Jewish girls who had been uh dumped into an abandoned factory by their SS guards  and that we would uh see what could be done the following morning.
I dont know whether you realize that this Austrian social  first social democratic government pioneered council housing.
One of the underground activity was to organize people  sometime to go and evaluate the disaster made by certain destr oy policy  by the Nazi in the valley  where we had so many partisan.
And  but it really got very bad in 1942  that's when it started getting very bad and where we lived in the City Hall  the notary  which he was the head of the city government  lived in the same balcony as we did  on the same balcony  and he had a heart ailment and was very grateful for my father's closeness  he could help him a lot  and I taught his children English and small children  young children  and he came to my father one day  and he said  \ You know  doctor  you would do right if you would send your daughter away.
ﬁIf he had co operated  I probably wouldnt have said a thing ﬂ he said  ﬁbut here s his file ﬂ and he gave me a file about two inches thick  in a briefcase  and he say  ﬁTake it back with you  look it over yourself  and we  the French government  want this guy out of this job.
FFI was under the direction of the exiled French government in London.
Actually  in 1936  the government established an honor for frontline ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 6 soldiers.
But everybody of course was very involved and very interested in  an d cared a lot about what was happening in Germany.
They would come in and take care of the government and so on and so forth.
Now when I speak of those people  I mean primarily government official  and relatively high government official s  with exception  with exception.
There was an outstanding re quest on the part of the former Yugoslav government  for the former Croat Minister of th e Interior  Andrea Artukovich  since the early 50s.
He said for twenty-five years I had asked the Polish government uh to send a physician here.
In  after the government of Nuremberg  a week later I left.
And he came the next day and said the British government decided you people have to go to Cyprus.
The Italian government of Badoglio   that was his name  his Air Fo rce chief I think  or Air Force minister had a Hungarian Jewish wife and when things got very hot in Italy  he brought her back to Hungary because he felt that in Hungary she has a better chance of survival  being the wife of the famous Italian Air Force general.
And I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0002 46 expect that such incidences will come up daily now that the archives of  of the former Soviet Union  the archives from all over the occupied countries where the German Gestapo was the government  are coming up now .
They said that he wants to overthrow the government; which I said  \ I didn't know he was so smart.\  (
A. Well  during the time that I was in that already was subsidized by the German government and given the time when I was in and that was only a few months there was also subsidized by UNRO.
And it 's interesting to see how in the documents which also are produced in Levi's book when we made joint interventions for the government  they were signed by   my boss  by Lutz   or Feller was my opposite  a young   Count Pongras and so on  Ambassador of Spain.
And the government  I think they withdrew for about quarter of an hour  they came back  we take the war.
You needed fi rst of all  permissi on from the German government and they would be there when we would pack our things.
8 Office of Military Government  United States 9 General Lucius D. Clay 14 to England.
Newt Gingrich  who is so maligned  some f our or five years ago  for his reasons felt that the public radio should no longer be funded by the U.S. government.
So doctors  dentists  pharmacists  teachers  government employees  every Jewish person had had to leave their job.
And before the break  Mr. puli Pawlikowski  we were talking about the moment  or lets say the the the time when you and your mother learned of the agreement that the Polish government in exile made with the Soviet Union  and what was going on  you know  in those in those immediate days an d months.
Moczar when I was there latest with Moczar he remembered this  the we took over the group that took over the government.
Well  there are some Noguchi sculptures in Seattle that the government  General Services Administration under its arts in in government buildings program put in  and a local congr essman protested that these were pet Interview with Peter Masters September 25  1998 124rocks  because Noguchi takes a stone and works it minimally  but very  very beautifully.
The Slovak government had the dubious di stinction of being one of the few collaborators who paid  paid  the Nazis for every Jew they took away and killed.
And he spent a lot of time in Kovno where the government -- Right. --
In my opinion  there are moments for international organizations  welfare organizations  where you have to speak out  and I was asked by the Red Cross at the time...I clearly recommended and pushed and was very active in order to that such a statement of denunciation should happen  but it didn't happen and was prevented  as I said  by the swiss government wh ich was afraid of the Germans.
They felt it was still a time where they could influence the new government  if it were to come  of where the Jewish community was.
Why don't you finish up the tape by te lling me about your receiving this socalled black book from the German government that gives statistics about what happened to your parents during the war?
I think the doors essentially closed with the Communist complete t akeover of the government.
And she gave it back to us when -- when we came back.
And -- And I went back when I was invited from the German government  to come back as a sort of -- as a  you know  a friendly gesture  so to speak of.
There was the Nationalist party  which was very small and hardly anybody joined it because they were kind of chauvinistic and there was the so-called ﬁnon-partyﬂ party  which was the government party.
And what the peopl e got was  they got the ration book from the children that they took in  and they got like a pittance of money from the British government.
And these people that you dealt with were people who were holding office jobs or  or were working for the government in a different capacity  not in the army.
He was a big leader for the war  he our leader from in war for the area government and I was working with him  yes.
Actually  I was an interpreter to a major who had that military gove r every regiment had a military government section.
SE: And then -- that -- it didnt come fro m the Dutch government and then we got married in ‚45 or ‚46.
And all his speaking with the Hungarian Nazi government or with the Germans  he was proving in other words  it wasn't just a piece of paper.
Then I finished my year in the Negev Desert  started my residency in Rambam  which is a la rge government hospital in Haifa.
And we went to that camp  we been so happy  my goodness  we have food  and you know  if somebodys sick  we have medicine  because you know  the they took care of us  the English government.
The troops ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 19 were there.
So the greenhorns have first to be  have  cannot stay wher e they want to stay  they must go to their destination  because there's an affidavit that these people guaranteed that they would take care of them and the gove rnment will not take care of them  the Canadian government did not want to take care of them  they just wanted them out as much as possible  because Canada was not so friendly to the greenhorns  beca use I know about internment camp s in Canada  where people from England were sent to and stayed there for many years.
But that time already again the government interfered in all kinds of things...everythings happens throughout the world.
The Bund was not in favor of building a home in Israel  the Bund was in favor of establishing our presence  and our life  and our privileges in Poland  in th -- Lithuania  in Czechoslovakia  and they played a major role  because they did more than -- than -- than expressed -- you know formulated  you know  ad -- and advocated the policy of fighting for our rights.
And the Czech government promised to find for us an apartment in that city.
And at the time that were talking about  1949 - 50  the first volumes of the documents on German foreign policy were coming out.
There were so many Jews in Poland; there was a network of schools.
Do you feel that anti-Semitism is -- I -- I do not believe that anything like that would be possible again  and I want to emphasize today  in my own mind  a tremendo us change in government -- in government forming of -- of laws.
Any way  he became my mentor for a while a nd Goldensen...in 1950 the Federal Government split the studios and the theaters and Goldense n at that time on behalf of Paramount was out all over the country buying up these chains  and he bought Richard's chain but it was to take...this was in May...but it was to take effect the 3rd of January and after he got back home  he began scratching his head and saying gees  what will I have by the 3rd of January.
And because of the Cold War which existed already at that time  somehow the United States government was pumping much more money into Puerto Rico   as a prevention that Puerto Rico wouldnt go too much left  like some of the countries did.
>> Fanny Aizenberg: Well  first of all  as soon as Poland was invaded by the Germans the government in Belgium had asked young men to sign if they would be willing to help Belgium.
And that -- thanks -- thanks to ja -- Dr. Jake Terry and Paul Wash. Paul -- Paul Wash  he just recently received a medal from Israel  Israel government  because him and his father save quite a few Jewish people during the war  you know  he was awarded  yo u know  as a -- a -- as a -- a -- as a man who saved some lives  you know  and he lives in New York City  and we are in contact too.
When he got there  he heard on the radio where the German army is advancing and the French government did something also not very smart.
And they were afraid if they displeased them  it would topple their government.
A nd one of the persons there there were some well-known Jewish peop le there at the dinner  and one of the persons there was and I cant remember his name  and he says to me were talking  and he was in charge of the I think this was during Carters administration  that the land was given by the government to the Jewi sh community to build the Holocaust Museum on the mall.
So to go back to to August 29  1943  I think for a large part of the population  there was a bit of an urgency to disassociate themselves from the Germans and they  I think many of them heaved a sigh of relief that finally the Danish government refused to further cooperation.
But I'd also like to say that due to World War II that was not the primary focus of the United States government  which was essentially to defeat Germany.
I don't quite know why  but the French had somehow promised the German masters  because France was now occupied by Germany  to keep all the Jews there so that they could be deported to their death.
But personally  I will never tolerate any dictatorship  no matter what the justifi cation is -- is given by a government  period.
He was early -- he belonged to the early conservatives who joined with   aristocrats  the Nazi government  you know.
He later told me  he said  ﬁWhen Mary came to see me  I said to her  how can I not help  when I a Jew -- when you a Christian want to help  and I as a Jew  how can I not help?ﬂ So he sent me an af fidavit that would guarantee that I would not be a burden to the government.
But Warsaw was a occupied part of Poland by the Germans.
I assume that the government was not happy with the activities that you were engaged in?
And that was at the time when the first non-Communist government of Poland was being formed.
But not that our government  our country believed in and promoted it.
The Danish government had joined the anti-communist pact with Italy and Germany and Spain so we were afraid whether the Russians would consider us helping the Germany.
It really was very difficult but the main thing was how was it that this government  youre talking about the American government  how is it that this could have happened.
And I hate to say it  but it was a young Jewish fellow I I dont know the fellow  but I know that there were people that work in the city government  and they tried to s to proba bly save their own skins  too.
Because he was a Polish citizen  you might say  in Poland became a communist country so they allowed all the Polish citizen to go back to Poland.
And because of our own involvement in the United States and the involvement of the Israeli government on behalf of Soviet Jewry  he was let go and he came to Israel.
End of Tape 2 50 Tape 3 You were talking about the fact that the Jewish government  the police  the Judenrat   really weren't that helpful.
They didnt have to buy a ticket or anything  the British government forced them to go  either to Canada or to Australia.
Sh e told  ﬁall right  I want also to ask if the German soldier is allowed to act as common robbers if all that we have belongs to the German government  you certain of the German governmentﬂ. Well  af ter long negotiations  my mother gave him some valuables.
That being said  I dont recall  at least its not -- it hasnt been in my history books  and theres no reas on to assume that even at its worst  the United States government treated Communists the way the Nazi government treated Communists.
So  military government as a matter of military law  don't forget Germany surrendered unconditionally  and the only government there was the military government originally Quadrapartei  the four pow ers  later split up but each in their zone.
5)2 medal awarded to Paul Strassman by the Cz echoslovak government for his participation in the partisans during the Slovak National Uprising.
It wasnt his notes  he had two stenographers  who always had to write down all his speeches  every session of his government  everything.
It was it was in a government building  the yar their yard.
And th-t he underground government  when they saw certain peoples  the squealers  or some informers  they used to issue the death sentences  and AK was executing these people.
There were very few Federal areas where the government had the authority to intervene  besides voting.
And the federal government turned around and said  when the -- if the contone will permit it.
But you know  when a man is trying to overthrow your governme nt  if you got in a situation like here  that you had a man trying to overthrow the government here .
So -- And then our people got together and they said  ﬁWe were going to -- the state of Israel is established  well -- lets send a telegram to the newly established government there  telling them that we would like to emigrate to Israel  because nowhere else we can go.ﬂ We were stateless people  without any nationality.
When -- when the Croatian government was formed  the Nazi Croatia -- 25 Right. --
Well I couldn't -- I kept on -- I stayed on with the government and it was -- the war ended in 1945.
They were above this  an d so therefore when the dictator of Hungary  Admiral Horthy  had to appoint a government  most of the time that government would not eventually do everything that the Germans want ed them to do.
death camps which basically gassed all the Je ws of Poland and certainly the region he was living in because the section of Poland that both he and his family was in was the general government.
And the little reporter  he didn't want to wr ite it because you're accusing the government of hiding things or stealing th ings.
And then  after a while  there were so many that the SS ordered the Jewish government to dispose of them.
But  but it was  they were important reports from the commander in chief in Poland to the Polish commander and chief in London and to the Polish government.
He lived here in Washington D.C. He was working for the government.
So  depending on what happened that day  we would write a le aflet  and then we would think of some other things that might ma ke Germans question the policies of their government.
Before the war started  already feeling that it was coming  we were diggi ng on order of the government  we had to dig shelters in the 6 street against bomb attacks.
From Krakow  we went to Bratislava  from Bratislava to Vienna  and then from Vienna to Germany.
But in order to get to Munkacs we had to pass through Poland  through the General Government  and it happens that when we passed the bridge uh over the Dniester in Horodienka we got picked up by Hungarian gendarmerie  uh beaten and uh we ended up later in the ghetto  in a little ghetto in Poland.
Oh  that was an accident  the well  again  after Lithuania the Soviets had called the government delegation from Finland in into Moscow and started discussions with the Finns  and they had also  you know  demands  which the Finns re refused.
And his message to the British government is  first theyre killing the Jews  and then theyre going to come after us.
From that point on  there -- the whole effort to -- to be -- to -- to ca -- to reach s-s-some kind of an understanding with this government  and the United States helped us a great deal.
And itsits more disturbing in places like Russia  because it pervades high levels (you know) of government.
CE: An affidavit is somebody states guarantee s for you  if you come here  youre not a -- a boarder for the government  they will support you.
Given  you know  given my military government experience of working  again  with the military.
Now  the burden of proof is on the government once youre here.
But we did an enormous amount of good  I am quite convinced that some of the the enthusiasm that was mustered  of you youve never seen government offices like that where people are really I mean  they would work into the night and through the night for nothing  to get things out  get things done.
By this little si do-doling out of money from the Polish government in exile.
Then  one day  when we had too many of those worms  they decided that the barracks should complain to the com first to the ci to the Elmshorn to the German government of that is in charge of the camps and prisoners.
Jewish refugees  I cant tell you exactly  b ut that was the policy.
He had a wholesale army and navy store and he was buying surplus 22 equipment from the government and refurbishing it and selling it in his store in New York.
And they offered her a job in America and she said  I am very happy here  and when the Czech government collapsed  somebody remembered the her job offer and he he he restated it and she accepted.
I found documents  its its its unbelievable that the American government could do this.
And when they started after the Jews of Norway   the Finnish excuse me  the Swedish government  informally sounded in Berlin   whether it would satisfy the Germans if they took these Jews into Sweden .
The gendarme had a plan  worked out years in advance of what they were going to do  and all they needed -- they couldn't get the approval from the Hungarian government before but under the pressure of the occupation they got the approval and they went to work.
The government didnt do -- they turned back a boat  and the people commit suicide.
The British had decided before Dunkirk  that the only way they could win in Europe is to adopt a policy of always telling the truth.
Now  Mr. Fisher  that policeman next door to us -- he was born in Ge rmany  interestingly -- he had told us  he said  ﬁWatch out for the neighbor across the street  he joined the party.ﬂ He -- He was just a totally unprejudiced man  as was a neighbor two doors further down  who was also a low level official in the local government  w ho was also very pro-Jewish and also very interested in us and incidentally  I think that he too knew -- yeah  he knew we were going into hiding so he es -- he -- he was very helpful and very well aware of it.
The Czech government also never issued to na -- neither the Germans have ever issued any-anybody death certificate.
And the people from the international Red Cross actually was the more of a French Red Cross  because when Poles wanted international Red Cross  the Russians broke with the Interview with Maria Pawulska Rasiej May 8  2013 47Polish emigre government that was staying in London   as the continuous Polish government  independent Poland .
When they finish school  high school  they were bright people  and they couldnt get government position.
So he worked his way up very high in the government.
And Wh-Wh-When did you leave Germany and how long were you there?
The policy of Germans was not only kill the Jews but eliminate all traces of Jewish life.
So  maybe eight years ago  the Po lish government -- Polish government put up a sign  historic -- okay  fine  historic area  what-whatever.
You had -- I mean  you had the Ku Klux Klan here  you got all kind of other people who are on the right track on trying to accomplish these things and fortunately they -- they getting stopped here by the government.
Well  while I was still at school at Cornell  I had taken out some insurance policy  so I had a little equity in it.
So  therefor e  i -- sabotage was a very serious attack on the German war machine  and that was  therefore  that the Germans  in 43  the 29th of August  where there have been quite a lot of sabotage before  that was railway  it means that the transportation between Germany and Norway  which normally went through the Danish headlines  they were disturbed  and then the -- the Germans demanded that there should be again  a general punishment for sabotage and for carrying weapon.
What he put down that I'm going in Hungarian government business to Oslo.
He was the chief  General Smirnoff   the chief of the Warsaw government from Moscow  and that's how I came.
It was shortly after the Communists -- the Communists were still there  but it was shortly after Deutsch-Czech government started making -- the Prague -- you know  there was this revolt against the government.
We made a proposal that we give our soldiers live ammunition for that parade  and the moment we are in front of the tribunes  we open fire at the government and show the world that Poland does not want what Soviets are bringing  and that that government created by Soviets in Poland means nothing to us.
That was Polish school  my mother send me to Polish school.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0077 57 Well  Jackie got friendly with a youn g man eventually  who was working in a government committee in Washington and who came from Phoe nix.
But  for all that the Israeli government pays  from the donation of the American government  the dollars and the Jews that donate money to Israel.
Your -- Your time in Germany  did you move from place to place?
And there was still the question of how much  what do the states do and what the federal government does and the evolving law.
Yes  and it still would have taken longer time  but the American government had passed a special law that permitted 18  000 military families to come to the United States for set Polish military families.
The Czech government always hoped that this action will finally satisfy the German demands and that nothing more serious will come out of it.
So  that was an unfortunate move from the government  God bless them anyway.
He later went to Israel and became a member of the Israeli government.
They didnt have any in Denmark  exile government in -- in the -- in the -- the allied countries  which was a bit of a handicap in the beginning.
The Yugoslav government was not anti -Semitic  per se  but it made a big effort to separate the Hungarian -speaking Jews from the Hungarian -speaking Hungarians two different things here  ideologies that.
And we heard by the end of the day that Horthy was arrested and then that Szalasi became the head of the state and a new government was sworn in.
He was sort of the unofficial Jewish mayor of the area and wa s the – He was the one who kind of communicated with the official government a nd the gentile community.
When you left Germany  could you just tell us briefly where you went?
When the war was over  our greatest asset was that we we succeeded in in convincing the Allied government s  the UN  to participate and take the responsibility for the surviving refugees.
The Jews did not ask for any recognition as far as government  or anything like that.
It took a very long time  and so Ive said many times it was fortunate or maybe because of that slow pace and the limited role of the federal government  that somebody like Martin Luther King had to come along.
And he came into power  and it's typical then how we managed to negotiate with him  with that government and how they approved those passports and all that and so on.
What Celene is talking about is that the people who hid children during the war had a policy that dark haired Jewish children would go to the south of Holland where most of the people were Catholic and were darker and the lighter skinned  lighter haired Jewish people would go to the north because there were Protestants who were lighter.
I didn't transmit them because if I did the Spanish government would probably say that that they that they didn't accept it because they didn't recognize the government while until then the government  the Spanish government kept quiet.
But you still didnt make a case that requires individual knowledge and individual acquiescence and responsibility  without proving that the individual defendant did know what he was doing and did willingly collaborate with the Hitler government.
It was a first only rightist government  and then it became more sliding to the right  more to the right  and at the end it became a Nazi government.
At one point you mention that the Vichy government creates a an official state organization for all Jewish organizations  Ugeef  u-g-i-f .
And they  they got out pretty much near the  you know before the communist government took over  but very shortly before.
The letter said that the hospital is going to be returned  as of such and such a date  to the Romanian government  and that the United States had agreed that this hospital  which had been taken by the Germans  would now be returned.
Well  just to mention here that I was raised in a rather very modern Jewish home  although my home was kosher.
With the local people who had to run away because they were working with the former Communist government  and they knew that they must stay away  otherwise they would all be killed.
administrative jobs and we removed thousands and that-- that was our mission  to cleanse the new government of -- of Nazis as much as possible at the higher levels.
The second time I remember he came to shul to speak that when before the war started and the Polish government saw that there have to be a war  so they wanted the citizens should donate money to b uy airplanes because the Polish air force didnt have too many airplanes; they had a few.
One of the things that also happened in the -- after we had to wear the yell ow star  that the Vatican curia I guess made an arrangement with the Nazis  the Hungarian Nazi government  that if a Jew converted  then they would wear a different color  I think it was either white or yellow or just white armband  and they would be basic ally exempt from the curfew or from the deportation  from the taking them to labor camps  labor brigades.
>> Gideon Frieder: In 1942  the Slovak fascist government allied with Germany conducted the census of the Jews.
As a Jew  could not work for the government  so he enlisted in the army  became a captain.
In the meantime  we received a post card from our father saying that he is interned in a little town in Hungary called Yur where Polish armies that after they could no longer fight the Germans and Soviets  they crossed to Hungary and were interned there under rather benign conditions because Hungarians  even though the government was collaborating  with the Nazis  the...the population...Hungarians were friends.
That you never you you never kne w you couldnt form a ny kind of units  like you know  people getting together and thinking and whispering and thing  because you were afraid of your neighbors  of course  but you were also afraid of your own children  because the propaganda was such strong thing  they said it if they if he heard them talking something about the Soviet Union [indecipherable] government  they would a a have agains t it.
In fact  our father told us not to make any comments about the government and so on.
If not  they would have been taken in Oslo for 4:30  five oclock in the morning  they would all be arrested  and then we had  of course  it had been [indecipherable] fighting for the government.
I should say that Hungary joining Nazi Germany as an ally.
Gave me a course and sent me to Germany  they said they needed people to speak German.
I did my student teaching in -- in -- in high school government  which was very interest ing cause I had the sweathogs.
Poland was occupied by the mostly by the Russians  you know.
And uh immediately agreed  but he really didn't...he didn't send it to L ondon  to his government.
In the process of the development of the country  and administration of the country  a little of these people  very good people  as a soldier  was 12 not necessary very good to be in government.
And if the government wanted to do away with special way Jews were killing their animals.
And  later on  there was a political I keep wanting to say the Spanish word which is convenio   but actually they the Croatian Peasant party was actually now a public party  and it was not anything that was repressed in such a way  and there was a coalition government formed with Doctor Macek.
But  again  it was -- S usi's correct  that there was this policy of mass shooting first.
The Russian policy doesn't mean anything but their policy 25 was that all the people from Rovno  to take to a strange front  to the opposite  not to...not...to strange territory  and I wind up with a division what ninety percent were Ukraine  from Rovno  from   which the biggest nightmare for me.
So  he decided he wasnt going to let the Interview with Joseph Eaton August 1  2010 32free French govern France   but there would be a U.S. military government of France  then there would be free election  and let the French decide whether they want de Gaulle or somebody else.
A. Well  on August 29  the Danish government resigned and curfew was declared by the Germans and a number of strong measureas  a prohi bition to assemble in the streets and many kinds of demonstrations and many other specific measures were taken with the German tanks were going through the streets of Copenhagen.
It might be that an order went in from military government that everybody in a certain industry had to submit a fragebogen.
Bousquet as the Chief of the Vichy Police  we obtained all the documents and delivered them to the French Justice because he had been sentenced and he was then excused because he had helped French Resistant Fighte rs  although there was this new evidence against him it was the opposite of Jean Leguay who was indicted and so in France I think Serge did a lot with the publication of the book called Vichy -Auschwitz to show what was the role of the French Government and the French Police in the arrest and deportation of the Jews  because very often in France you have directives  I remember our butcher  a woman she liked very much my Mother -in-Law knowing that she was Jewish  she said you know it is terrible what happened to the Jews in France  the Germans did it!!
And I cannot  as I said earlier  personally say  that I was persecuted by the Portuguese government.
The only thing it was that uh  the Swedish government went in at least twice a week to deliver some food and medication.
And at Nuremberg we had the benefit of their rulings to guide us  and in addition we developed our own rules as we went along  all of which were then si published in a big volume  volume 15 of the green series  by the United States government.
Then  to make the story short  because its so -- so ve ry shor -- big story  we are -- stayed there for a 72 month  and we are allowed by the Soviet governme nt [indecipherable] the military government to -- to go home.
Interview with Samuel Marein-Efron May 8  2013 42 Well  Ill tell you very truthfully  Mexico was a strange place at that time of even though they the government itself was very friendly  and didnt care whether you were Jewish  or not Jewish  or whatever you were.
First came Koıice  1945  they established a new democratic Interview with Mikulas Judikovic April 14  1997 101Czechoslovak government.
They had  they had legitimate papers that were given to them by the military government of the Third Army.
Im not suggesting that with certain exceptions  the German postwar government has wanted to  but needless to say  in the 1950s  nobody knew this  and we were looking at the past experience  which people had  as opposed to the future experience  which for very good reasons  people hadn't had yet.
But -- And in that  of course  there were many Jews.
It was seen as something that the government was not doing much about.
Even tually what happened really is that we spent there from 1928 to 1933 in Romania and the Romanian government has expelled us as a family.
The policy of returning Jews or not letting them stay lasted only in the very first weeks of the Ustaıa regime.
2 Like the VNV  the Rexist movement was subtly fascist in its later stages although  officially  it called itself an authoritarian government.
The Italian government of Badoglio   that was his name  his Air Force chief I think  22 or Air Force minister had a Hungarian Jewish wife and when thi ngs got very hot in Italy  he brought her back to Hungary because he felt that in Hunga ry she has a better chance of survival  being the wife of the famous Italia n Air Force general.
Interview with Maurice Friedberg August 12  2009 80 Except that you were allowed to go to Venezuela   provided you lied about your religion  with the connivance of the Ven ezuelan government  which allowed only white  Christian immigration.
The queen left with the whole government  and they left us  and they fle d  and they were [indecipherable] no  because those ministers left their wives  and childre n in the Netherlands.
Uh but it was compulsa...this was...this was schools were not recognized by the Polish government.
And it is a history that's unfortunately more or less supported by the current government  that the Hungarians were not complacent in the extinction of the Hungary Jews.
There was a huge demonstration  like 300 000 people  Germans  demonstrating to protest the lack of response on the part of the government to the assassination of a Turkish immigrant.
That was putting pressure on the population of the government to -- to -- Stop. --
And I think the political system that were under  where we flip back and forth between a Democratic party in control and the Republican party in control at the state and national government  kind of keeps everybody off balance  at the state level and the federal level.
And I kept running and running and running  until I came to a big fence that was the  the Lithuanian government had had built up a huge animal  animal in -- animal  animal treatment for -- how do you call it?
And then they did as -- the f -- the fren -- the French -- French government  the S-Switzerland  Holland  Engla nd.
So they had they th ey were for post government to get rid of those lard large landlords  and divided that between th e peasants and the small farmers.
In the newspapers were the news  Im sure about -- about Hitler  all these years  you know  that we learned about whats going on in Germany  and -- but it was never in these papers how it was -- there was a single Jewish newspaper  but I -- I dont remember to have seen it  really  and so I dont know.
They had a meeting with government officials  in the Library of Congress  with Verner Clapp  who was then the deputy librarian of Congress.
The Polish government was in London   but Polish underground underground w as in Warsaw  and th-they made my father the successor to .
Given the political circumstances and the rise of Nazism  did you learn later  did you know if for your parents -- how do you in the midst of that environment -- was that something that was very worrisome to them?
And I always remember that barn  there was a big storm before the war  and the wind tore the whole roof off  and we had to pay a lot of money to rebuild the roof on it  and the Polish government put a new tax on us for the new roof  instead of giving us a tax reduction.
The release came about because at that time  the Nazi government was satisfied if a Jewish person could leave the country  they let you go.
It was taken...in that particular time the Hungarian government issued some decrees that certain age  young Jewish men has to go in 5 that...in that district and whichever district we lived  and so my brother had to go and left in 1943.
The first one -- they -- they -- each one have -- have some numerics attached to it -- article two or article four  I -- each time the government -- the -- the German government comes with some beauty every -- every so often.
Wa explain how there could be a Polish government  where was it?
I say  well you cannot appoint me to a senior executive position in the federal government that easily.
The Dutch government paid for our hotel rooms in Madrid  in Lisbon.
And so the reconciliation between Poland and Germany  which is very real  is probably the best achievement of -- of this Solidarity government.
You don't want to do it  so you are coming against our interests and against our policy and against our interests and our wishes  so how can you say that we are friends.
The government had not given any special permission to do that  and so we discussed and we reached an agreement that he would postpone the...and together we would go to the park  in the center of the park  where there was a committee composed of various police forces  the Nazi party  the Foreign Affairs Ministry  the Interior Minister and I don't know who else...seven or eight people.
Then I worked in textile  and after I st-studied here and completed my studies in University of Connecticut  I and then in New York University Business School  then I worked for the government.
Going to Germany two  three -- I went to Berlin in fir -- first time in 56  you know  and -- and the question was not the old Germany  it was the east Germany  you know  a-and the west Germany  what we do to rebuild them  and th -- the -- th-the -- the -- the -- the -- the acceptance of a occupation policy  who was not very wi -- wi -- all the aspect of which are not -- we cannot be very proud  because we use  you know  th-the-the police  we use -- etcetera  you -- i-is simply bring back of what the contemporary situation with Iraq  where we did not want to use the army in the [indecipherable] of Saddam.
Now  Vichy collaborated with the Germans  obvious ly collaborated with the Germans.
There the English 24 made the Italian government  the Italian forces to arrest us and we spent in Statsia about 9 weeks or 10 weeks.
All the functionaries of the Russian government and Party had their trucks and their buses and other means of transportation stacked away somewhere.
In other words  people who were more t -- 30 Communists or certain other tribes  they didnt want them  so they put them in there and controlled them so they couldn t undermine the Nazi government.
So when I got to Treya  the captain who in charge of military government  been maybe there 24 hours and 48 hours  and had found a German who was willing to be a coordinator between the military govern ment and the German administrative Interview with Joseph Eaton August 1  2010 51system.
So how long were you  as part of the military government operation  in Germany after the war?
But they were in charge  and then actually  the Soviet government was in charge.
I wrote to the French government  to different organizations and -- but then after right now with the Clarksaffair and -- thi ngs like this  I obtained a letter from the Clarksand I notice that my aunt was on the transport on the list.
Now  when we came back -- after liberation we came back home  we were notified by his wife that the Russian government wants to put him in jail because he was -- he was an informant and -- yeah  he was an informan t and we dont really know what happened  what he did  because we were in Romania  right?
Then they changed this in 1940 because they incorporated Silesia and the same thing to the German right that means we belong to the Polish government  what it was  but the German Reich.
Okay  so now its occupied  there is no more Lithuanian government  the president has left.
Which was very dangerous and not not it it you know  its something that may have worked for a month or two  and then they had to fire them  a-and give them a new set of papers  and rehire them  because the Germans not the Germans  but the the USB   the Slovakian secret service suddenly got the list of people which had died  and this man these peop i-it was a a very complicated undertaking  but he he managed to to save  I would say several hundred  if not not not a thousand  or more people in the Zylina area for from the Germans  until 1944  when the Germans came in  got rid of the Interview with Samuel Marein-Efron May 8  2013 21 Slovakian puppet government  and that was the then there they took Jews  no matter whether protected or unprotected  or whatever they were.
I cant follow tha -- I -- up unti -- til today I dont understand why -- I can understand why the general population wouldnt know  but the government either wa -- wer -- werent any smarter  or were they -- or didnt want to be smarter?
34 And so its -- if its issued by the Lithuanian government  do you mean the Lithuanian provisional government?
And uh that uh came after I had gone on a bicycle trip with a Jewish group in 1937  I came home and my parents told me uh two affidavits are waiting for you - one from my uncle in St. Louis and one by a children's organization also in St. Louis  both of them in in fact worthless as far as the stipulations of the American government were concerned which wants to make sure by financial backing that the immigrant would not become a public charge.
And they made the trial that they were Trotskys and they were spies against Russia  against the Stalin   against [indecipherable] government in Czechoslovakia .
The reg ent appointed -- >> Bill Benson: The head of the Hungarian government?
However  the German gir -- government acknowledged that I worked there  and that I got my compensation for that.
I dont know exactly  you know  how to answer this question  but my mind is if somebody want to be anti-Sem itic  then I dont -- I dont think actually  if you have rules  regulations from the government  you - you -- about discrimi nation  but if you -- somebody doesnt want to get friendly with yo u  its no use -- if you try to force it  it just backfires on you.
Tha-That the German German military government de-delegated some some to to those.
And he would still be friends and this was this guy who was in the  he was never in the government because he was in Yugoslavia.
We went many times back to Poland later on because Bert was working with the governme nt  the Polish government.
And they were had the red flag there  and they were speaking in Lithuanian  you know  against the sovi Smetona government  against the the w hole system  against the fascist government  as they called here Smetonas government.
But they know about everything  because the banks are the government.
My father got involved with some kind of intelligence work  with some Armenians from Lwow   I believe  who had contacts with the with the Soviet ssphere of so I believe that they were working on a whats happening after the Germans invaded  or occupied Romania actually  after the fascist school  and what was happening in the Soviet zone  and they were contacting this Polish government in in in Paris  and then in London .
Well  I was doing a ch -- military government a nd division headquarters if they had problems.
The teacher cam e and he announced down there to the -- to the -- to the head of the village  that he -- he was sent by the government to organize a school.
Yes  oh  yes  but not with my parents  with other children; and even though after 1938 when the sanctions came into existence  Jewish children were not allowed to attend school.
And Per Anger writes it in his book and he says that at that time because in Hungary  they always made jokes whether there was a war or not that the Swedish government was the greatest landlord in Hungary at that time.
It was probably some higher-ups in Amer ican government in occupying forces Interview with John Krawiec January 29  2015 188 Okay.
I was in Stockholm at the time of the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto  and I knew about it  and I wrote a memorandum to the Polish government that they should exert their influence on the British that some kind of re taliatory measures should be threatened to stop the extermination of Jews.
And for a while  at the end of the '40  maybe beginning of '41  the Iron Guard was part of the government of the dictatorship of General Anton escu  was most extremist right say wing  fascist wing.
Becauseatonepoint  the armyorGerman government saidwewouldliketoconsolidate thecamps  because afterall there wasalotofallthesepeoplecoming fromtheeastthatwere livingpretty badlyand they wantedtohave these.
People started to work  some people started to work in Jewish agencies for the American government.
I mean -- the government would have to be extremely strong.
That she said  she remembered the German  the Dutch government would not allow immigrants to live with their relatives.
Did did did the officials  the government officials  or your family  explain why this had to happen to you?
I think the Czech government  that was very -- now  when I read about it in the -- recently when I read about it  I wa -- Czechoslovakia di d a -- had a great hand in es -- su-supporting the establishment of Israel.
And during wartime  incidenta lly  the fire department  and that was made known also  did never  never did anything to protect or put out fires in ordinary apartment houses because they were needed for mo re important objects  you know  either government or military installations and so on and so the whole population had been trained in extinguishing fires.
There was Slovakian government  but there were German offices in the capital city of Slovakia  which is Bratislava.
And so I dont I think I would never be one of those government haters  and no matter but y ou have to watch it  you cant just let government do what they want to do if its not right.
My father was pretty adept at getting along with the government.
You know  they belonged to the government  they wasn't like a boss for himself  for themselves.
I dont think it was a a government  I think it was a Jewish private organization.
There was no central government in Germa ny until the fall of 1949.
is in mankind by itself  it's only the bad thing is being manipulated by government  by regimes  and the Aryan side  I was...I realized that governme nts and regimes are one thing  but mankind by itself is a problem...is a problematic thing.
The first thing  I think that the government was infiltrated with German people and they ma de new laws  especially for the Jews.
In order to cu -- to get the visa from the Americans  we had to have a paper fr om the Austrian government saying that we had no -- committed no crime  and that sort of thing.
Did your parents try to explain any of the Nazi related events to you when they began?
Of course  a lot of Russians were okay  except for the government.
The third one  which is still floating -- the Swiss government wants you to keep nice and warm  so if you meet certain criteria  they will give you one time sum of 500 dollars.
A lot of government officials had to be convinced the justice of this.
And this uh Shmuleski   make the connections with this main camp  and they  and so I gave this and he told  you should all observe and tell me and we will  the Polish uh prisoners have contact with the Polish government in London.
We brought in some publicist  someone from Life magazine and I appr oached the German government through the Ambassador in Washington  and he said  \ We can't pay  as you know.
And also  I had to present  with the chief rabbi  the government.
And w -- that -- that is what I hope that the government finally will change  and do that  too  because there is a -- a need so badly  and -- and there is a need for -- for peace between those Arabs.
So  he decided that maybe if he gives her the real estate that they had - houses and apartment houses or something - I dont whether she ever got it because the Polish government took over all the properties  Jewish properties  so nobody gets anything anyway.
If somebody had be tter apartment you had to move  to vacate this apartment to German  or to the kra -- Ukrainians or whoever.
And that is also a apologetic element  just to put Hitler in the foreground all the time  because -- and our function was to show that the responsibility of what had happened  had to be put on broader sco -- shoulders  and that was  over there  some mechanisms of the -- the one hand  the -- the style of politics  and the perception of politics  which was specific Fascist  and a specific structure  which put Jews then what I call cumulative radicalization  which may explain the proceedings  or the -- the way Nazi policy took  and t -- that can be especially  I think shown with respect to the Jewish persecution.
Except for Interview with George Pick November 13  1997 97 Di-Did the tightening of the government   or what you had to do  did that bring back any memories of the war?
France was split into two parts  into -- one part was under German occupation and consequently a very early and fast policy of seclusion  der -- of anti-Semitic decrees  one after the other [indecipherable] th-the telephone booth is -- you were not allowed to make long distance telephone calls  and you had to wear the jew -- by that time you had to wear the Jewish star and so forth and so on.
He himself used some of the uh propaganda of Birksen to put it...to the disposal of his i own policy.
There was a quota  you couldnt -- and -- and you -- you -- you had to have guarantees that after we -- if -- if you would -- if you would get to the United States we wouldnt be a burden to the government.
And in 1972  the West German government requested and obtained the extradition of a Long Island housewife named Hermine Braunsteine r-Ryan  who had been a camp guard at the Lublin Majdanek concentrati on camp  and who had evaded jus tice afterwards  married an American serviceman  and had come over to live in the United States  and who was sort of the epitome of the quiet neighbor that Allan Ryan tried to reflect in the title of his book in 1983.
And perhaps the -- the labor government is more acceptable to a lot of people  because they were  perhaps  more -- more amenable.
We were in good working relationship with the akar  with the armia kryova  with the Polish akar  and the reason for it is because this was an area where before the war Poles were considered colonizers  you know  occupants  you know  that they were sent in by the Polish government to Polonize the area.
But then and that was the reason the government ca the county office closed the the local wici organization The youth organization.
I wanted to ask you  what was the official position of the government in exile on the treatment of the Jews?
I would encourage you to look at our website and see the various programs and initiatives we do to raise awareness and influence the policy makers.
My parents came - we brought my parents to Athens one year after I came and we uh  my father had some representation from a chemi cal factory who thought they could sell their pills in Greece but after  by the end of 1938 the Greek government wouldn't allow us anymore to renew our permit of residence in the country.
We were exempt  because a lot of things that he told us  it was not true  it was just to boost our confidence but by that time there was such confusion everywhere  in higher government places that who  who knows what was really the truth and what was not?
After liberation  this man petitioned the Polish government to get this sidewalk out  but you know they don't come out in one piece and not exactly the same shape anymore.
Very few Bulgarian Jews remained in the immigration transition camps  Mahanot Olim 18  in Hebrew  where people from other countries sometimes stayed for two  three years before they could find their own way out and had to rely on the Jewish agency or government assistance.
What happened in 1944 on the verge of the U.S. government and financial support of Jewish organization  a Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg went to Budapest for the very purpose of saving as many Jews as possible.
And she...her husband got a good job with the government; and they have huge house in Silver Spring.
And sh e always said if he w ould have still been in the government  Hitler would never have come to Austria.
It transpired that they were liquidated physically  one by one  gradually to the point that by 1947  when elections were held  the Communist Party had already solidified its control over the whole government and the rest of the so-called coalition partners were really figure heads that didn't  didn't count for much.
So the German government gave these burned-out families  something what we have here  what we call food stamps.
Every Jew got a quota how much he had to pay the government.
And as much as life generally speaking in Lisbon at the time for as far as I can remember...uh...other than going to school at the time  I...uh...being a member of a large family and my father  at the time...uh....God bless his soul  was working for the Portuguese printing department of the Portuguese government.
In the the americ the the government paid f the G.I. Bill was that time  they called it G.I. Bill  and the government paid for everything.
And this was the time where there was movement to get the Jews out of Poland.
And he started with six kids  and now its one of the biggest things  and the government asks  take our kids  take our kids   and it has grown.
And i-it took a while  and there were problems with the Bavarian government  which was very hesitant and put a publication run limit on the print of the book.
>> Bill Benson: Petain was the head of the French government.
Pole -- the Polish government passed a decree in -- I be lieve in the summer or spring of 1939  which was aimed at Jews  and to a lesser extent at Germans who controlled almost all of Polish industry at the time  that hard currencies  nonzlotys  held abroad by Poles  had to be repatriated a nd converted to Polish money  the zloty.
You also must understand that the quisling government found it very convenient an d so did the Germans uh to sort of have 20 their own order because that gives them jobs   nationalistic and what have you.
They were in the arts  they were in the government and really  you know  a very well established Jewish community that in some ways went all the way back to the expulsion of Jews in 1492 from Spain.
That also came to use because he then started to negotiate with them  the new government  about these passports.
And -- What -- what -- how did you feel about be ing in -- being in Germany again after the war  and doing this work for the American army?
The government did not want to support us in any way  so we had to prove that there was someone we were coming to.
Its another to think about a policy that becomes when mill ions of people -- Well  its a leap -- its a leap of -- not leap of faith.
The letter from this  what used to be the Italian cultural and it was in the government  with all these stamps and the letter said that you know Miss senorina  senor ina Trude  it was all in Italian is a friend of the governor of the coastal area of Albania and should be allowed to pass because that was for their know.
First of all  my parents come from Russia and with the Russian army  they could communicate and then they started to organize different businesses  everything under the government control.
And people were upset for the lack of reaction of the government  and there was a huge demonstration in Bonn  at that time the capital of West Germany  -- I forgot the name.
He was in the ultimatum where the Russians put the ultimatum to our government.
And there used to be Jewish police  you know about that?
I I got s I dont know if its from the German government  the IMF  the International Monetary Fund  and I got  I dont know  se ems to me like it was three or 4 000 dollars  something like that  quite a number of years ago.
And the first thing they did -- now  a new government came to power in Hungary also  a pro -fascist government.
And I went back to Germany to also get my visa.
I knew that he worked with us  but I didnt know that he was charged by the U.S. government  of rescuing famous people.
We knew -- he -- he told me those are government finance operations now  you know  he begin to talk.
A government with all the institution  with all the propagandas  with all their might  was -- were planning a execution of a people.
Interview with Susi Frank Annes October 4  2015 92 He was an attorney  went to Washington   wanted to work for the government.
So  the government  whoever they are at that point  has something against you  so they arrested you.
Because I reme I thought it was when Germany attacked the Soviet Union   then there werent enough soldiers to help defend the allies  and the Polish government in exile came to an agreement with Stalin.
We were  of course  in contact with the official authorities  the government  to get information but we just were the receivers of that information we were not creating the situation.
It was extremely strenuous  because you had to have someone who would promise to support you for the rest of your life  after the German government had taken just about everything you had  so you would expect to arrive  essentially  financially as a pauper in another country  during the Great Depression  when the welfare systems of all countries were about as strained as they could be.
This is tape number one  side B. And we were talking about your government ca reer.
Because she was an invalid the Polish government paid her pension  and of course I tell herI told her  Mother  do youand my sist er left for Sweden a different way  not legally but forand from Sweden she came to Israel.
In Jambol we were stateless because they no longer recognized the Polish government in London  and the government in Moscow was not yet formed.
Mili Ribbentrop was a German repres-representative of of the government  and the Molotov was the the Russian like min Soviet.
I dont think anybody was too interested in how the government ran  or what was happening.
But what I learned later on  after the communists took over Russia government  and then stopped a war  Lithuanians declared independence.
I thought it was much too technical and very lacking in -- at least the way it was taught in those days -- very little policy orientation and there was sort of various te chnical  dry case analysis that didn't  to my mind at the time  didn't fo cus on what I tho ught were important issues.
Since uh you couldn't take out funds from Germany...we all were restricted to just ten marks...uh certain ly parents and other groups which who uh tried to get out  took with them whatever they could...uh jewelry if there was the permission to do it  but also uh expensive cameras and and so on and these cameras or uh music instruments and so had 23 found their way into the uh uh British market and the Chamber of Commerce in England had brought it to the attention of the government that they considered it unfair competition because  you know  when the people came there with no money  they sold it for whatever they could get for it.
Eve ry able -bodied Jewish male from the age of 16 to 60  had to work at least one day on assigned places of work that the Jewish community  and later on the ghetto community government  administered.
There were no Latvians in the government or in the s -- no Jews in the government or the civil service.
And he also gave me a letter from the Minister of Interior which said that the Spanish government two years earlier ha d granted me their citizenship because I had fought in the civil war and also  the letter also said...and that I had asked for a citizenship and the letter said that they were not able to locate me and that they now found me and I had to assume citizenship  Spanish citizenship.
You have to go to the part of Poland which was not incorporated into Germany but which was formed as what they call it  General Government  and government general of this territory was Hans Frank who was later on  you know  at the Nuremberg Trials was convicted  you know  to death and was hung.
And the government and the fascist Siauliaitist party kept sending pickets to picket some of the Jewish stores so gentiles should not come in.
My father had two associates who were Greek Orthodox  and one of them was very  very influe ntial in the local government.
But there was a Polish population in school also  and at one point  I think there were classes in school  were given in Polish.
Now  when youre talking about the help that your father got from the government and from Ronniker  youre talking first World War.
And I could continue And there were at the same tim e a good number of students of this type which were supported by fellowships which came partly from Rockefeller and partly from the Swiss government.
The other thing that concerned us as we lived there for 2 months  we heard that the whole Chaco is a military area under the...under the government of the military institution  which we also didn't like too much.
The Germans were responsible for having a government like Hitler and for letting that government persecute Jews because they were not watching what the government was doing .
No  no  no  no  Im saying when Hitler came into power in 1933 in Germany. [
And even there when we moved to Poland -- I mean  dont 19 forget  Poland was no long -- Poland was now occupied by the Russians.
He [indecipherable] 45 in Germany  and we thought that he was work ing for the Greek government  trying to find out things from the Germans.
>> Bill Bens on: Nat  with the war over  your father returned and the family trying to re -establish yourselves  knowing that the government included many folks that had been the fascists and now communists  you would live under that environment for five years  until 1950  when you immigrated to Israel.
You cou were not allowed to go to forest and bring any forest  because this is government.
And they were out there to go along with the Vichy government law bent on pleasing and collaborating with the Germans.
Do you remember anything specific about the closing in of the Nazis when you were in Aachen?
In fact  theyre the ones who always pushed my husband to come USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0079 35and work for the government.
So  it was a great thing for these Polish women  and one of my most touching moments in my whole experience in this business was a group of them waiting at the airport in Poland to greet me when I came as a guest as the Polish government to express their appreciation for my effort.
The head of the government  I was notified that she was coming back  and lo and behold  she came back.
Not the way in which the German government oper ated at that time.
And besides  my father was very -- he had a successful -- in business  and was dealing with the Lithuanian government and he thought  probably at the time that nothing terrible is going to happen to him because they need him.
And after awhile the Tito government wanted to -- wanted to get this gold back to Yugosla via and United States said yes  after you have compensated United States businesses that were there pre-war  and s-some of our -- an-and our citizens  American citizens whose -- whose property was nationalized.
So there were many Jews who felt primarily as Germans of Jewish faith.
During that period  and in the month af ter that  we were interviewed almost on a weekly basis  by the Swiss government   the Swiss Red Cross  Swiss newspapers  Swiss radio stations  Jewish organizations in Switzerland  America  Canada  Australia and South America.
The nuns  I wrote to the Belgian government because I really feel it's important to get them recognized  to acknowledge what they did.
Oh  then -- somebody worked for them with the government  spoke to the people in Nairobi  and said that we had already purchased the farm and would they give permission for them to go ?
Interview with Niklas Frank June 6  2016 71 Thats a huge tru Printed edition  and he saw it  because of his fight against Himmler   who was a really powerful guy in the government general  he wanted he was sure that the Americans wo uld acknowledge his fight  and [indec ipherable] Te-Tell us a little bit about this struggle.
We were three days without any government at all when we came to Slutsk.
Adults  so mething else  their sense of establishment when they came  what they did  why they didnt help  the whole issue about Roosevelt and various emissaries  and the interest that the national government had  and what they had to do  and [indecipher able] the first to rec ognize that the first interest had to be the protection of this count ry.
They they feed us  they clothes us  they medicine  everything was English government.
And he he he was basically very  ver y friendly with the government.
Hopefully their governments will never permit that  because I think ultimately it is not the people who direct those activities  it is the government that does it.
No  theres n-nothing special that I needed to or wanted to add  but I was just trying to give it perspective  and -- well  and our departure was preceded by when the Italian government fell.
And so we would be writing and Henry would be meeting -- I might accompany him with others  to try to negotiate  either with UNRRA or with the British government for better facilities here  and better facili ties there.
Thats a memorial book that the German government publishes with all the names of German Jews that were killed.
And they were told us Polish Jews  \ You're not even welcome back in Poland.\
Yet Horti  who was the head of the Hungarian government was refusing to let to do anything to the Jewish people.
The Israel government had a purchasing mission  sitting in Cologne  we tr acked it as a [indecipherable] embassy  but it did not have a full status of -- of an embassy.
And they can influence the higher people in the government  and even the President Roosevelt himself  to help them with uh with uh arranging matters.
In the -- in government they didnt do anything technically  but government the people  and through condition and position and salary  especially salary.
I was afraid of the Polish Communist government  I -- I never went back.
Did you get a sense through that work of the overarching USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0017 34 policy issues involved with -- with Jewish immi gration and some of the -- I mean some of the things that were going on on national levels  like this  the United States having very strict quotas and having a lot of [indecipherable] Oh yeah  I was aware of that -- by the way Ike and I got the job  through Henry.
The German  the government  the geminder gave an apartment to my aunt.
A. The Jewish community tried to convince th e government to open up at least a little bit more and from time to time we succeeded but in most cases we have to admit that the 6 government was afraid of creating a problem in Denmark.
But today  most of the researchers in a way of taking up our Functionalist -- Functionalist elements of explanation  and everybody gets aware that Hitler was not a man who was -- had -- had that [indecipherable] personality  you know  that this was a merth  and that things are even more -- were even worse  because there are many people who -- who pushed the process  I think  atafond  and certainly this viewpoint increases a responsibility  and a moral responsibility of the nation  versus a specific Nazi perpetrators  you know.
If you open a war the who fought with the Germans had no sympathy for the Nazis of the Germans  not at all  but thought that we spoiled their policy and the difference was not that both our wanted the best for our people.
There was mutual agreement between Poland lets say the government  Polish Interview with Thaddeus Gubala January 27  2015 95government in exile in England   Sikorski   with ma with the Russians  fighting against common enemy.
These were mainly the people who didnt have government au thorizations  who had had auth orizations only from Parryom Poppovitch.
In other words they had to guar antee that we would not be a burden on the United States government  that we would have a jo b waiting for us and a home waiting for us and that we will not be any kind of burden of the government or of the United States citizen  that we would not take aw ay their jobs  their ho mes  etcetera.
Do you -- They -- So your -- Are you differentiating between the Czech government and the Czech people?
There were a lot of Jews from Poland that were in Germany  and they were not citizens.
And at that time uh I went back to Portenza  that big...big town where we came from  big town  that town where we came from and uh we uh...I sought uh employment and the Allies are a military government wh ich was at that time it was called AMGOT  Allied Military Government of Occupied Terr itories and was later changed to the Allied Control Commission.
And he was a delegate at the International Socialist Peace meeting in Basel  1912  and he returned from Basel  and told me  \ Boy  from now on  no more war because when the government declare war  we socialist internationally strike.
And once people were taken there -- once the Jews were rounded -- of Paris were rounded up and taken there -- So -- so then the French government decided that they would use a place called .
And my father said  ﬁWell  thats a terrible gang  and -- and ﬂ -- and I said to him  ﬁWhy -- w ho allows them to do that?ﬂ ﬁWell  th-thats their leader.ﬂ And I said and what was going to happen  and he said  ﬁWell he -- he wants to be the -- the head of the German government  and if he ever comes to power ﬂ -- I said  ﬁWhat -- what will happen then?ﬂ And he said  ﬁMay God he lp us all.ﬂ So I remember that  Ive never forgotten.
So so then  a little bit later is Cossionair  the father was a commander in the French army  and he was a prisoner in Germany  and the German government released a lot of a lot of French prisoners  all the officers  they were released.
So the government was hostile  and the people was 10 times more hostile.
