But he didnt speak Polish  I dont know about his Jewish but he spoke only German that time.
Yes  they were Jewish Oh  they were Jewish girls  yeah  I ha I have one very close Jewish girl girlfriend.
So I can really say because we were all in Jewish circles.
Today we hadn't had an im migration in 1969 of Polish-Jews  a couple thousand Pol-Jews  the Danish community  the Jewish community would be very  very weak because similar to what happened in some of the states of America.
Even when they catch you  you know  some Jewish people are very religious and follow exactly the Bible  and some people grow bear d. I not mean a beard now  beard  and have a special black coat.
How can a whole nation collectively turn away their faces from the wholesale murder of the Jewish people?
And so no I mean it was known that they were Jewish by many people and Openly?
Hamburger  my last name  for a Jew  youre not too bad.
The -- the Jewish fellows that you met  who had experience with the Nazis -- Right. --
He was a Jewish fellow  and Garfinkel could speak Yiddish and German and uh  we used to uh  have Garfinkel come over and interview German prisoners and he delighted in speaking Yiddish to them and uh  of course they could do nothing  nothing about it  but we we never controlled that type of thing.
Did it make you feel f -- strange  as a Jewish pe rson  or not want to be Jewish  or that didnt occur to you?
I asked the landlady  ﬁWho did this?ﬂ She said the Yiddisha Geminda   the Jewish people assigned.
They selected a few Interview with Irving Schaffer October 19  1993 16th-th-they selected two leaders  two well re putable Jewish leaders in the in th from the Jewish community to run the the ghetto.
And also  Bustelli told me that the Swiss Intel ligence knew that they would use a Jewish prisoner in a mock attack on the German  and claim that it was in stigated by the Jewish people.
We dont speak Yiddish either.ﬂ And they couldnt understand that American Jews  Jewish relief workers who couldnt speak Yiddish.
Now  again  if the Germans that would come there  I was the only Jew that was circumsized  they would recognize.
And this is a tragedy  see  that -- that the whole world that time  no want to listen about this tragedy  whats happ en to Jewish people  what they was doing in Poland  you know?
She was hiding a group of Jewish people in the attic of Vilnius University library.
I -- from the Jewish -- the Jewish Federation gave a hundred dollars a ticket.
That's one thing not to like Jews and that's the next step is to hate Jews  then the next step is to kill Jews and so there was a big 4 difference  but already by the age of maybe fi ve or six  I knew that some people hated me just for being Jewish and that's the kind of world 01:14 it was.
So  in other word  number one is understanding of the -- of the structure -- intellectual structure of a deconstruction wh-which si -- is contrary to the fundamental Jewish tradition which  insofar is it is common to the Christian origin.
And was that one of the first realizations you had that as a Jew you were being singled out?
And I ask one time  ah -- I -- owner of a big Jewish company store  hes retired  so I said now you ca -- you can visit Israel.
In the school was only four children that were Jewish and I  from Russian school from Siberia  I have pictures.
I can -- I want it to be a nation thats -- historically it belongs to the Jewish people.
They started to round up Jews  in other words  coming in with their guns drawn in their hands and you they rouse  \ Jew out\ .
I was talking to the ladies a nd one day in the conversation I said  yeah  we're Jewish.
I think my father– I mean my mother basically grew up in a small  country town and was Jewish  but had many more associations with non-Jewish people.
So you are an unusual Jewish person  doing this at this time  no?
You knew where -- they -- they would tell you where they were from  yes  they would tell you where they were from  but -- Did you know at that time whether or not they were Jewish people or not?
Well  we ended up by October in the house sharing the apartment of relatives in a place very near to the Jewish quarter  but not inside of it.
I only noticed those in 1937 but I know that Brundage the  the head of th e American Olympic committee went over to Germany to see what was going on because here was so much resistance in America against taking part in the Olympics so he went over there and I read later on doing some research that Berlin was manicured terrifically  everything was clean  every  all the offendi ng signs  dogs and Jews not allowed etcetera  etcetera  they were all gone and Mr. Brundage was not a champion for Jewish causes as I have heard  never spoke to any Jewish people  he just let himself be lulled into some false sense of security by these Nazi s saying everything is fine  were doing everything we said we would do and he came back to the United States and said everything is fabulous over there and well be going.
For instance  what did you do as -- in the regional part -- Jewish partisan  this -- you know  or that day -- or that day  a few days  or -- especially  you know  about -- they were interested in activities  about the life.
But I was lucky and they didn't think I was Jewish until after I go.
But you had to move into sort of a sublet  into an apartment already inhabited by another Jewish family.
I was the president of my fraternity  but in the ghetto it was not important whether you are a or you are a general Zionist or you are a Labor Zionist or whatever you have...you are a Jew.
So we were all Jewish there  and the Germans would say  \ We have...we need some\  ...through the Joodse Raad  I suppose...\ We need so many people there  and this person  this person  this person...they are necessary because you can't leave those children alone \  so there was no doubt for me that I would stay on.
Uh...I was indirectly involved because  for instance  after spending some time in Europe in the British Army in the Jewish Brigade group  you are entitled to a vacation home.
The other one here is more Jewish  and Im proud of them  but You see  religion has played a very small part in their lives  the kids lives.
01:06:05 3 I recall  as a child  these Jews coming down from the mountains looking for Jewish homes; and begging for food  begging for warm clothing and so forth  to take back to their families in hiding.
She didnt look Jewish at all  and she was dressed like one even.
And we came in there and there was a Jewish woman  she had a little grocery store and she say to us  \ I have a little apartment.
How did the Jewish community in Pinsk treat you or accept you?
And he  and th is man wanted to become the president because the Germans said you have to orga nize a Jewish council  but the Jews knew if he would become council  it would be very bad for the Jews because he was  like I said.
SO I had kind of like a test which the Army knew about and they needed people that had some type of a  a little education about it so they really picked me and they felt since we havent got too many Jewish sailors and you had a little bit of schooling about it.
Now  some time in 42  youre able to go to a Jewish community synagogue school.
Having installed the Jewish police and here is an element which I would like to mention.
I went to a Jewish day school in Saint Louis for a few months  and my parents didnt think I was learning enough English.
Im wondering if there was ever a conflict between your Jewish identity and your Jewish practice and your social life?
And -- but we had to take other people in  because for -- what they did  if you lived in a -- in a section with the non-Jewish area  you have to leave that area and come into the Jewish area and that area was -- they -- they made that a ghetto.
And my wife asked me one time  ﬁWhy do you think that he is Jewish?ﬂ No t because of her [indecipherable] had to impress her  but I think the children should -- they -- thats one part of the learning process  that you can be proud of some peopl e -- when its a criminal thats being shown on TV that is Jewish  or -- certainly not.
He was a rabbiner in Wilna who was responsible for the Jewish community in Wilna.
I know that all of the -- all of the people [indecipherable] it was strictly kosher and therefore had to come from Edinburgh from the -- from the Jewish butchers.
I suppose it was a question of upbringing  because afte r losing World War I  for which many Jewish Austrians were great enthusiasts  they they suddenly found that war is hell.
There came an order from  it looks like  you know we were involved with the and other organizations that worked underground from Israel to bring the people  the Jewish people into Israel at the time.
I dont think there was any distinction back in those days a-about being a Hebrew or a Jew or whatever it was.
Also was in there a friend of mine -- you know  I -- I cant at the moment think of his name  but I -- I sh-shall at a later -- probably a later time remember the name  and his wife had given birth to a baby  and she was still in the hospita l. And he got word out  he paid somebody  because some of the half Jewish people  they were like [indecipherable] they were doing things for the -- for the people.
And I didnt even know that she knew we were Jewish.
There was a special relationship between Jewish Americans and the black community in America.
As I did in Detroit  I tried to teach Hebrew at the Jewish center  here in Washington  and to adults  conversational Hebrew.
They start to arrest a lot of Jewish leaders and non -Jewish leaders and to put on uh  in prison.
Everywhere where the Jews were the center of civilized life  of cultural life was concentrated in the Jewish communities or singles.
But she wanted to he lp me and there was a friend of mine   he ha d a   he marr ied us  but warned us  told us another marriage still  when you can because according to Jewish law it's not valid because she is not lawfully converted.
It's not uh surfaced as much as what we went though  but there was a Jewish couple...I can't think of their name.
I actually lived in his attic.ﬂ And we finally found a real Jew in the attic.
How we organized  how we smuggled in this -- all this business and especially and they were interested in the J -- Jewish group and then if we participated in 73 any mission as Jewish group.
Because many  many Jews became very big patriots  mostly communist  you know  they embraced the communist because the communist said that everybo dy is equal  no differences if you Jew or not Jew  and they became a very big communist.
And except of which I went to concert and I went to theater  all Jewish theater  I mean Hebrew theater.
And they they so they could they were not allowed to be in the in the trades  and so apparently nobody wanted to be a cow Jew  or a cattle dealer.
And in this time...this was I think the first uh uh the first groups that the Jewish young people was called in called up to make uh labor service  and there was a weekend when I was honest alone  without my company  and I decided I am going alone to rowing on the Danube and I and then I find a lady friend and we went two together and there was a little uh not restaurant...a buffet...accidentally and there we find each other...there my my later husband began to speak to me.
My parents were Jewish but completely non-religious and I think that we were treated as rather a curiosity.
And they went over to them and they told them it is a group of partisans and this  and they said  ﬁJews on top of this  what?ﬂ Here this a Russian general came over  a Jew.
Can you find out about the Jewish girls  Bella Sigler and the others?
We had a Jewish tailor  Mr. Mr. Grzebien  who could make a beautiful fitting outfit  regardless what it was.
But we had so many Jewish people  and y -- that didnt make any difference.
35 Tape 5 ...was in the Partisans  because thanks to him  my husband survived  beca use my husband was in Partisans  one Jew in the Russian Pa rtisans.
But within 48 hours Jewish organizations from Warsaw came and so for the next nine months or so for me it wa sn't a terrible thing.
In here  where 99.9 people are Jewish  its a closed community  you have to have a gate to come in  somebody vandalized it.
And if you didnt have that  there were a few instances  but not in my family  where an organization  a char Jewish charitable organization might find a way of providing what was called an affidavit.
Oh no  no  the SS is different  but to be on the safe side  we ll check with headquarters  and they gave me a temporary deferment until further notice  and also the other half Jew.
They knew a little bit about it  but not -- it wasnt advertised  nobody -- nobody read the paper whats going on this country or in that country  but we knew  any Jew  anywhere  they had no -- it -- it was not pleasant for them anyway  we knew that.
He was 17  18; he went with this Jewish girl later on ŠBep Davidson  Beppie (Betje) Davidson  Davidson. [
In order to be secure  because it wasn't safe to walk through Kovno for the Lithuanian partisans who didn't know who I am and didn't care who I am  I had a distant relative -- a Jewish distant relative -- who was a former volunteer in the original Lithuanian Army.
Q. Was it your sense that there were othe r Jewish members of the resistance --?
Did you -- you too -- you -- you -- you said Jewish?
And to make a long story short  a Lithuanian  a non -Jew  had good relationship with The Red Cross.
Blame the Jews  the Jew is the first one to go.
The Jewish cemetery in  in Kielce; I  I survived that one.
She said \ I did tell him that we were actually Jewish.
She gave it to the Jewish museum in Berlin.ﬂ And 67 thats the old Jewish museum  not the [ind ecipherable]  its called -- has another name  something or other [indecipherable] in -- in Be rlin it was behind the wall when the wall was still up.
But I was working in the store there -- once I owned the store and one of the things that was happening to me is that I was not making a lot of money  and -- I backtracked a little -- and I was -- it was getting on my nerves  I was not making a lot of money and I was -- had to deal with a lot of people  they were like Ukrainian or Polish  and theyd come in  I spoke their language  you tried to be nice and they would always accuse you of being a cheat because you were Jewish and so on.
I felt that as a Jewish girl I didnt have much of a chance.
My father -- there were number of Jewish doctors  there was Dr. Rebach  and doctor -- some invited my parents  you know  just to -- because they knew they dont know people.
frame of mind for for Jewish peopl e. Whether they believed it or not  they certainly rationalized that that they would nobody would harm them physically  because it was a civilized country.
We were told once that somebody had been up near the cookhouse where they made it and theyd seen erm one of the Jew girls who worked up the cookhouse had opened up one of the cans and had peed in it and er  and er  I said to the bloke who had told me  do you know which can it was because it would taste better than ones we had. [
When I tell people Im Jewish  you can feel the discomfort.
We had a actually the only Jewish services we had in in in Tokyo were the holidays.
Q. What did all the experience -- did it impact your sense of being Jewish or sense of being religious at all  or the fact that you were hidden by Christians make you think differently about being Jewish?
And and af ter we received food and everything from the Russians  we then this Russian soldier  I dont know what his rank was  or what  but he was this Jewish soldier was a little bit more educated and we became the guide to his officer  and showed him where to go in Berlin from point A to point B  because we knew it so well.
I come to find out later on  my brother told me  that the priest was actually a Jew who was in the underground.
No Jewish questioned at all but we need friends and we need -- and so it's how about a contribution now  and my father had him thrown out  fired him and threw him out.
But -- but I studied the tal -- not the Talmud  the Jewish [indecipherable] right away started then  before I came Bar Mitzvahed because you have a lot to know in the Jewish [indecipherable] law.
My mother had another sister who was a very active with a Jewish newspaper here in New York  is it Forward ?
He was worse than Horthy Miklos  but when he spirited Horthy Miklos out they called him he was he was a Jewish collaborator already  Horthy Miklos.
My parents then were taken to \ the perfect Jew \  the main state headquarters.
Germany is going to kill every Jew  and they going to make camps.ﬂ So my buba Chana say  ﬁYou crazy.
So bef before the annexati on  when youre still able to go to to a state school  did you take any supplementary   or so-some sort of Jewish classes at the end of the day  or or on Sundays  or No  n-not really.
But the... the...the all the Lithuanians in the city spoke about it that a Jew in the ghetto brought about the release of a Lithuanian who kept...this is most remark able incident.
And that's how things got orga nized that even those fascists got used to it  they didn't want to listen anymore to their leaders because their leaders had mind to kill everyone  Jew  not to stay alive  not to be able to testify  like I have to say testimony today.
I told him in Polish that yes I am a Jewish girl.
Why cant you be just a ni a Jewish businessman  you know?
So we  Jewish  forced labors worked on the four p.m. to midnight shift and we had to so rt dirty laundry for the German 5 army.
My parents ki lled Christ and I told her  years ago it wouldnt have mattered to me but now I am Jewish so we better part compan y. I suggest  I told he r  I dont want to stay.
Husband) It was in Europe usually the Jewish women were housewives.
So then I became angry because I do have my temper when I let it and I said  all right  I collaborated  and that really finish it  but they were upset with me that this was the arrogant way of me to answer and it really aggravated me so that's what I remember  that for a long time I had to hide that I am actually Jewish.
12 Ferdinand aus der Funten  the commander of the German Security Police  who oversaw most of the Jewish Council's activities.
Our Chairman of Private Practice    that's a Jewish doctor and there are not too many Jewish doctors in those days.
And the two of us were brought to a farm which was run by the Jewish Boy Scouts of France.
But there wasnt suicides there  occasionally you heard a displaced person  a Jewish displaced person killed some German.
He came out and a few Germans on horses they were   because they spoke to him in Polish and they said to him  you SOB  run back because they are going to kill you with all the Jews around  and my father was a Jew  and my father had no choice.
At that time  they announced that the place has to be Jew -free  everybody went his own way  wherever they had relatives.
And what stands out in my mind is that they -- the Bulgarian lawyer and his German wife moved in  they conducted a sort of cleansing  religious ceremony with holy water and everything  but expressly done in order to cleanse the Jewish spirit out of the apartment.
Thats a Jewish institution which was an orphan asylum that took in the kids that had parents but was -- parents no longer in the country.
In 1943  the I was a-as an individual Jew I was always beaten up by the kids in s in th e school  including the teacher.
We went sight-seei ng and took our jackets  you know  so they wouldnt see that we were Jewish [indecipherable] our arms.
So we told him that when we come  you know  later  when we were leaving  I said  ﬁWell be in touch with you.ﬂ When I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0046 46 came here  we met there  through my -- through my uncle back here  because he had a little store -- this was a man who doesnt know -- Jewish man  who hardly knew how to sign his name  very plain guy.
When Hanna was provost  and we were friends  because of they were at dinner lunch at our house once  and I said we Interview with Guido Calabresi July 27  2017 118 were talking about the experience coming  and I said  but of course  it was very different for you  because her mother was Jewish  her father was a great German historian  whose chair at Heidelberg was paid for by the Rockefeller   had been given by the Rockefeller in 1930s.
I made a it wa it was all Jewish mostly Jewish education  going to service in the s ynagogue  studying in the evening  in the a in the afternoon  whenever  Sundays.
Uh the liberal Jewish community really grew after the war because uh most of the survivors had that kind of a tendency and he led the liberal movement and actually the uh liberal Jewish synagogue in in uh in Amsterdam is built with the whole Holocaust theme of  the theme of rising from the ashes  and uh that movement is the one that uh led after he finished his rabbinical studies.
I raised my children in a kosher home  in the Jewish religion  to the best I could.
They werent local  they they came from surrounding villages and walking through town from the railroad station  they saw that the five remaining Jewish stores were smashed  and the word goes lik e wildfire.
I mean  in Red Cross there was this new worker there and she says to me  ah  the Poles were so horrible to the Jews  killed them during and she is not even Jewish.
They didn't go upstairs because he was good enough not to say don't kill me but go upstairs there's a Jewish family.
3 Political prisoners USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0003 33 33 Are you Jewish?
And she said  \ Well  my father told me I'm no longer allowed to play with you because you're Jewish.\
You were staying in the line when the Germans came in for a loaf of bread and a Polish guy saw you and said a Jew.
One was my best military friend  who was not Jewish  but who had also come from England  so he was USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 99 military.
When I go to a synagogue I don't really feel very much because it's been dulled by what I think has been the exclusiveness of the Jewish religion as we know it today.
So  we had contacts every day in every situation  most of all with Jewish people.
And they were always telling me whethe r I was five or six  that I am nice and that I am pretty and that I am a good girl and that that security has lived with me all my life  no matter what people would throw at my face and tell me that Im bad  that Im Jewish and Im this and Im that and genocide you know.
There was a Russian expression that the populat ion -- the Jewish population used.
In other words  if a German soldier would look at you  he knew what you're in for  whether you were Jewish or you were homosexual or you're a criminal.
No  I we as I said  we were we were 20 girls for a 44 girl class  so there were quite a number of Jewish girls  yes.
The judge said  ﬁAs a Jew  you really made a case.ﬂ My father said  ﬁIm a lawyer.ﬂ The joke was  she was over 45.
My mother was a Jewish person  my father was a German.
To the directors of the school  but I normally didn't tell pe ople I was Jewish.
01:12:50 Up until this point  were there any restricti ons on Jewish people in Bivolari up until '39?
Was that apartment building or the ove rall neighborhood mostly a Jewish neighborhood?
They were Catholics and I was the only Jewish person in this Catholic school and that was a Edwarda Rorat 23 February 25  1996 Page 23 private Catholic school  we had no penny to pay for it.
And Im saying that [indecipherable] I was -- feel Jewish only by -- becaus e I was born into it  and I found -- I studied philosophy  and I found that its extremely ethical.
We asked the Jewish Police what are they going to do with us?
I got myself funding from the National Humanities Counsel  and from Jewish organizations  and I began to educate the College.
But apart from our concern over her health  the other two major concerns that were discussed every opportunity at home were  especially for Father  how to come up with a large sum of ready cash in order to pay our assessment under the so-called ﬁunique taxﬂ that was 3 King Boris III of Bulgaria 4 Ratnitsi Napreduka na Bulgarshtinata [Champions of the Bulgarian Advancement] (Bulgarian) 5 imposed as a first step toward ultimate confiscation of Jewish property and ﬁbﬂ how to find documentary proof of his service some 25 years earlier as a military prosecutor with the Bulgarian Armed Forces -- a service that under the law could exempt him from some of the restrictions  especially the restriction on professionals to practice their profession.
And then we learned  it was a few days later  there was a big fence between the Russian and the German Jewish ghe tto.
I am immensely grateful to have found refuge and become a citizen of this great nation  where I've had the freedom to plan my own future  to worship  or not  as a Jew.
All Jewish men became Israel  and all Jewish women became Sarah.
German wouldnt know me frfrom from nothing  whether I am Jewish or not  you know .
So for the first time  when I got to Magdeburg  I met this man  the man who--the Jew that I had liberated in 1945.
Did you...what what was it like being a Jew in Yugoslavia?
And the Jewish people yo u know  there is a mother with the child  and two little every the Jewish people have children  a lot of children.
Incidentally  I  I  I neglected to say this  it hadn't occurred to me at the time  on the at the time of the riot  one of the things that I realized was that there would be Jewish DPs in the cinema.
Really  y eah  it was just maybe a block or two blocks in our cit y was strictly Jewish.
And after we started to work  around December  beginning of December  somebody gave me idea to write a telegram  to send a telegram to Arad  the Jewish community  to the Jewish community office  putting in that telegr aph  my name  the name of my uncle  his age  his wife name  and when he was living  the street.
No self -representing Jewish boy will swim across the Danube at night and join those people in the woods.
Uh...The president of the time of th e Jewish community in Lisbon was Professor Onsolack.
Did you have I called him they didnt call him by a Jewish name.
Because the British didn't let the Jewish people to come to Palestine.
It was just like uh said...whoever's a Jew  I I decide.
So all these people that you worked with  the resistance  did not know you were Jewish and it was important not to tell them?
In Jewish they call it 20 kind of thing  but it is a wagon driven by horses  a special passenger.
They had been  more or less  like unterwald Jewish people  you know.
I suppose the records which I've got here th at 92 percent of the children were Jewish so that 8 percent were either on Hitler's blacklist or were communists or were writers or were children of that type who were in danger  and I think we've hardly made any of them who ever saw their parents or relativ es again.
But also in 1945  that was already after the war  we had a lot of Jewish people that stayed in the attic th e whole night  and we give them food; 50  60 stayed in the attic  slept Š we had the beds on the floor.
This person is with the Nilos and he was a little way uh friendly together but I get this letter from my husband that this person must be Jewish  very elegant  Nilos but Jewish  and I run up and I open the door and I am shouting at the boys...here is the  here 34 is the Russian army.
And they did it once when they ha d the strike  when the first Jewish young people were picked up  they had a strike in Amsterdam  all the municipal workers stopped working and it was a mass demonstrati on that day  and there was is a monument  [indecipherable] dock worker in Amsterdam  to remind us of that.
And when she was in Szydlowiec  she found letters from my uncle written to the Jewish communi ty asking whether anybody by our name from our family is alive.
Interview with Alan Kalish October 24  2003 16 Most -- mostly Jewish  ge -- a -- and Ill te ll you  like Im -- Saturday afternoon  thats the only time we had  because was no Cheder  no nothing.
They grew up with a Jewish education  and the reason  I didn't point this out before  why I wanted to be Jewish and that was a question that uh  came up with  between me and my wife before we got married.
I think we got the help from that Jewish Gemeinde  and also my mother remarried in 1945 a man that she knew from before the war.
That they have returned back to Vilna and they hope as Polish citizens to  they had  there was a certain law  that you were allowed to live   Vilner   thats we Jewish people call   if youre a Polish citizen you were allowed to go back to Poland.
Most the Jewish people  they go  but nobody can imagine -- but when  you know  they going die it was already too late.
I had a - I had Jewish friends and their parents had this kind of -- in fact the -- the -- one of my girlfriends mothers was a writer of childrens book.
It was late autumn by that time  because it was before the Jewish holidays and however the two days turned into eight days.
Was it just coming in and going out  or -- No  its a -- its -- as I told you  when it was Yom Kippur  the Jewish holiday  when they took all the people  that what I survived  this action.
She said  \ You're a snob \  but later she told me  \ You're a snub nose and you're slavic  slavic face features.ﬂ But anyway I find out that she's Jewish.
And she told him that he is Jewish  and that his parents left him when he was two years old  and the parents perished from the Holocaust  and thats it  but he was Lithuanian through and through.
If any time I spoke to anyone  not necessarily Jewish  not necessarily people who have been in a concentration camp  but if we just had general talks or discussions about all kinds of things and it would come up through history  through the time  what happened in this year or w hat happened when that took place in the world and then I would say  \ Well  I see it from it a different point of view because and these are the things how it used to come up.
Thats the -- in the army they have chaplains who are catering - catering wha -- providing the military with moral support  or religious support  who on Sundays have a mass  if theyre Catholic  or theyre Protestant  and on Friday night have a Jewish service in that army chapel  which is -- in the army serves all faith.
He saved him in his own house  so I don't know...maybe he he probably knew that I am Jewish.
Well  the midwife  she was Polish  and she didn't want to have a Jew Jewish baby   you know  for longer than few hours.
By having this in my pocket  I felt a little more confident  except I coul dn't be in my city because everybody knew me as a Jew in this hometown.
Everyone wasŠ Every Jewish community accepted the certain amount of displaced persons.
They says  the -- the Jew  they -- they sort of a-af raid for their securities  not sec -- we are n -- we 111 are ruining their hiding place -- their places [indeciphe rable] its just ma -- excuses.
Like  I was mentioning these Ru-Russian so ldiers the Jewish soldiers  and they were really trained  they were really some [indecipherable] what they say  they really did.
Unfortunately he wasn't able to fulfill his dream because after the war in Hungary  they enacted a law which was the very first anti -Jewish law in ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 4 Europe even before the famous Nuremberg laws which restricted the participation of Jews in higher education to the percentage of the general population which was about 5%.
After that when I'm-- I meant my Jewish enemy now about six  seven Jews were on the radio.
And they put on a sign: \ Kauft Nicht bei Juden\ --\ Don't buy in Jewish stores.\
Was having a Jewish identity  was that a topic in the home or they just spoke of themselves as Americans or perhaps Russians who had left?
Where did we go -- a place was a leather factory  a Jewish leather factory.
And he wrote that book and that is just about the Swedish situation towa rds the Jewish people in Sweden between 1930something when the Nazis started off in Germany till the end of the war.
And after the German s retreated  they killed the Jewish population in Russia  and he saved a few Jews.
The Lithuani ans said only we were deported and all you Jewish people were not deported because you were Communist and blah blah.
Sein -- Seindel  yes  Seindel  and her name is in Jewish  yeah Seindel -- Shinya -- no  sorry  her Jewish name is Seindel  her -- the name by which everybody knew her and called her was the Russian diminutive of Seindel  which was Shanya.
False names  you must be a spy \  and I said  \ No  I'm telling you I am Jewish.\
He had to run off because somebody in the organization of his administration had something against him and they spread some news about him -- he was Jewish also and somehow he had to flee .
And I think that -- I don't know  my parents protected us a great deal from the outside  so I don't know that I felt -- I did feel different in having to take the days off for the Jewish holidays.
In fact  at that time  and D-Dutch did not leave let Jewish people without visas to go somewhere else into the country.
And I am telling them that should not happen to anyone  because [indecipherable] the Aryan Nation in Portland  Oregon  Richard Butler  who is the chairman of the organization  at one of their meetings  he said  ﬁI will not take off my r obe  until the day when the last nigger and Jew with be executed in United States.ﬂ And they -- somebody from that organization killed a Jewish radio talk man in Denver  Colorado.
We had no chance for to ever to survive  even if we should be able  if you have a dream to get out  the Poles are so  they're bloodthirsty for Jewish  for Jewish blood  and the Poles are not going to let us ever survive  so this was clear to us  and then we got confronted this Breshinka  Birkenau was not  Breshinka  in Auschwitz in German was Auschwitz  but in Polish it was Auschwitz  and we realized that we were really entered in enemy territory  and therefore our chances to survive there would be none  so we figured  how else can we do that.
And we had to show him our penis  you know  we are Jewish.
He -- he was the chaplain  stationed with the army in Berlin  but as he and other Jewish chaplains  who were in these areas where there were remnants of the Jewish community  the Shehari taplata was a Hebrew word for the remnants of the Jewish community.
So I went to Boston  and the Jewish and Family and Childrens Service took me in  and they found adoptive families for me  and they found very nice families and they wanted to adopt me so badly.
We had like a Jewish communit y  like a community center.
Was Jewish people  and they support and I think the Jewish organization from Israel to help him  lots of them.
They always had to have Catholics  they came to Catholic organizations  they had Jewish  they came to a Jewish organization.
And then I continued my studies  I did not wa nt to have the same experience again and I went to the Jewish  the Jewish rabbi school  really  what it wa s  it was a school to educate future teachers  but it was a high school still.
These should be in the National Jewish Library in Palestine  that's the successor  inheritor of all this stuff.
Since I left there by the time I was about six or seven  I really dont know very much about the religious make-up of the area  but I would say it was it was a a typical urban area  and certainly not a Jewish area.
It happened every two years so in this small Lithuania with about 155 000 Jewish people inhabitants  they took part in this elections about  I think  more than 45 000 people.
From anytime that I get it with somebody with American Jew gives me a jeep  th at snower  I got to give him a jeep.
It so happens  if you want to  you know  give a child a Jewish name  it is Rivka - because Regina is really Rivka - but I was never  in Tarbut  in the Hebrew school  I had the name Regina then was Rivka and  but I was never ever - I was either Regina or Renia  I was never Rivka and to be singled out like this  I dont know.
So we were walking down the highway and I said to him  Wallish  what would you do if some Jewish people that are hiding in th e forest would jump  would attack us now.
This is a decisive moment  and it's not an accid ent  that in the general scene and on the Jewish scene  Morgenthau was deeply involved.
He wants to see  he knows they are Jewish people  they circumcised.
I would have been one  I would have been Jewish  but -- the Hitler Youth.
I had an uncle Sieg mund Korn   wh o was a member of the Fi rst Zionist Congress in Betar and he was a convinced Zionist and interestingly and he explained to me 2 about the Jewish history and about the Jewish buil ding a nation on their own as soon as  who would understand and I was  from the begi nning  when I knew that nationally  ethically I am a Jew  was an important issue in Prague  because Prague was the capital of Bohe mia and there was a fight for the languages there  between Czech and German  the Je ws all held to the German side and all spoke German while most of the populat ion spoke Czech.
On my mothers side  it was because she -- my father wasnt Jew.
So I said  ﬁOkay  so if thats what you think I should do  fine.ﬂ And thats when Martin Goldman asked me to do this video and this -- the synagogue was getting ready to put out that book a year or two later and like -- when was it  recently  theres a Jewish in - USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0038 87 - there is a day in the Jewish calendar called Yom HaShoah  which is a Holocaust memorial.
29 End of '43 because that wa s where it when it was most 28 Varosliget 29 Conditions for the Jewish population of Budapest quickly deteriorate when the Nazi-backed Arrow Cross party seized power on October 15  1944.
And children understand it now and when you reach the kids it's a wonderful thing and I'm sure it will hurt Raoul that every year I'm writing about 500 New York State schools for a senior person and that includes all the Hebrew schools  Jewish schools and catholic schools.
But it's confusing when you start reading at times and remain Jewish like the question is asked.
I wanted to put in some newspapers from Germany  where they spoke about the Nazis  one paper I put in  about there was a law that Jews we re only allowed to have certain names and my name was not Jewish enough and therefore I had to add the name Isra el.
And  as I told you  we are in school -- theres a school  we -- we were very proud of be-belonging to the Jewish people.
There were many Jewish names  if you think of th e -- what is it  Chicago seven  you know  and all that  theres a lot of Jewish names  but of course they were not participating -- I mean  they were not practicing Jews  number one.
I I think he became quite active he be I know that he became quite active in the Jewish community.
And I knew nothing of another world but a Jewish world.
Uh of course the Nuremburg laws uh immediately uh ma...we were forced to dismiss immediately the uh uh very nice young lady  young girl who had worked as as the household help of my mother and we had to take a woman uh I think over forty-five because that was a law that only uh women uh supposedly uh safe from the hyperactive Jewish male sexuality uh would be protected  and so she immediately left our household.
Also because they go to So lomon Shechter  which is a religi ous Jew telly school  and they go partly to Solomon Shechter  because I pay for it.
And  when we arrived to Budapest at the train station  the Jewish community was waiting at the train.
Was the other 10 percent Jewish  or were there other denominations?
Like people that the area was designated for ghetto  and they were not Jewish  they had to find apartment outside the ghetto.
There was another boy who was Jewish  and the Dutch were very good at uh respecting the Jews so when the Princess Beatrice was born and all the Dutch school children got uh with some orange sprinkles on it  they got for the Jewish children kosher with butter on it.
And every Jewish family  of course  wanted to have their son finish middle school.
And he worked for a big Jewish firm from Breslau  what he sent...he sent money for me.
I mean they were not 1 Palestine 2 really religious but they would go to the synagogue because they felt as a Jew you needed to stay together.
That Jewish captain  because he had some stripes  he says it's not what they told you  it's what it is.
He wrote about the Jewish hospit al in Berlin that youre talking about.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0011 7 7 Were you discriminated against at al l for being Jewish during your service?
And there was no  you know  pre -- pre-school  you know  anything -- Did -- did -- yeah -- did you feel Jewish ?
I was you know we lived in this 20 th district which was all Jewish.
I was looking more like Christian than her  because the whole Jewish tragedy was in her eyes.
Ten days later  all the women between the ages of Jewish women  ages of 18 and 40 were ordered to come to a soccer field  which was the Kishauk soccer field.
That was 15the only time in my life I denied being Jewish.
I made friends with Dr. Dimetritus  because I helped him in -- that he was a Greek -- not Jewish  Greek that USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0053 21run the -- the -- the hospital in the displaced camp  and also the head of the displaced camp.
You could not walk out to the street without having the Jewish star sewn on your coat or sewn on your ja cket or on your dress  depending on the season of the year.
Anybody that walks on the sidewalk that way they were grabbing to go to work  because they knew they were Jewish.
The only one who saved Jews  the only one who took in and there -- Keeto took in in his ga -- in his underground Jew -- any Jew who wa nted to go in.
And I went Interview with Eric Simon June 21  2014 20to the real part of it  and well  only about  I would say six Jewish boys this was an all boys school  and I believe there may have been a girl separate girl gymnasium as well  six or seven Jewish kids among about 300 students.
The example is that if any Jew showed up  he was gone.
And since being Jewish was not a matter of choice  you may as well do it.
The Slovak anti -Jewish legislation ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 9 was harsher than the German Nuremberg Laws.
We met at the Jewish Theological Seminary because this is half-way between where he was staying and my where my house was and a lot of reminiscences and of course we sort of corresponded for a while.
Did you go to a Jewish school in Belgium Interview with Fa nny Aizenberg April 21  2011 25 No.
We had people from   this is already later  Italy  Ra ffaello Cantoni came -- who was th e first president of the Italian Jewish communities after the war.
And they will help me as much as they can; but they were not allowed to do anything for the Jewish people.
Now  did you go to school a-at your same Jewish school  or did you -- It was the same Jewish school  but different program.
And I dont know how he survived  because he was Jewish.
And I we had alrea dy a different mayor  because th-the mayor which we had before was married to a Jewish woman  they had a child.
The single Jewish people  they were well  they were taught to meet somewhere  and thats was something what I always call like Madison Square Garden.
My father told him about our Jewish tradition  and eight days later friends of the family  neighbo rs  everyone gathered in our home in The Hague for this  for a celebration of this milestone in a Jewish life.
Youre a German  okay  youre a German Jew  but we didnt blame them  of course not.
The German give 10 liters of vodka to bring in a Jew dead or alive.
I picked up my husband and there was a big conference  and he was uh...my husband and the Jewish   the people  the President whom I knew very well there  Mr. Stern   uh they had a big...and my husband said sit in in the back and just listen.
They -- except I have friends  and I made friends in the displaced person camp  and I made friends in the camps  who came from cultured eastern Jewish families.
It was something very attractive to us  to be in a land that historically we take our roots from and for a couple of millennium there was a continuous history of the Jewish people and since we are persona non grata in Poland  in most of the countries of the world in general  then Palestine loomed very largely in our consideration.
I came to Interview with Morris Rosen August 5  1999 22Vallin  I came to the police  can you tell me I heard there are Jewish girls.
In the pages of history  the year 1943 will be desig- nated as a period of the cruelest blood-letting of the Jewish people.
And then I would have sure -- the kids perhaps would have been more Jewish USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0014 128 than they are now.
Matter of fact  I remember much later when I was working already as a lawyer in Prague  the entire office had one Jew.
So during the five-year period that you we re going to one place to the next  you were actively hiding the fact that you were Jewish?
He never knew it  because they -- he was going by a different name  and he didn't know it that his grandmother was Jewish  and he was with the priestly clothes  taken out from the church  and he was in the ghetto.
So -- but that really hurts  because in a way I knew that the reason for it  because I was a Jew  but its very hard for children to accept.
Have you ever seen a Jew that's not on the run.
She was  she was in Ravensbr uck concentration camp and she's one of the few people to have arrest order  which says why she was arrested and then the order of releas e from the concentration camp  she has  she has  most people do not know it  people do not know that she was Jewish.
We were looking for restitution of looted gold  if there were any looted gold there  and we were looking for some kind of claims with respect 14 Jewish Restitution Successor Organization (JRSO): Based in New York  JRSO was organized by various Jewish philanthropic organizations to handle restitution issues.
In 1941  the third anti -Jewish law came into effect which was similar to the racial law which the Germans passed in 1935  the socalled Nuremberg L aws which was characterizing the Jews as a race rather than a religion.
He said you have to excuse me because the whole night I had to visit Jewish families.
Bousquet as the Chief of the Vichy Police  we obtained all the documents and delivered them to the French Justice because he had been sentenced and he was then excused because he had helped French Resistant Fighte rs  although there was this new evidence against him it was the opposite of Jean Leguay who was indicted and so in France I think Serge did a lot with the publication of the book called Vichy -Auschwitz to show what was the role of the French Government and the French Police in the arrest and deportation of the Jews  because very often in France you have directives  I remember our butcher  a woman she liked very much my Mother -in-Law knowing that she was Jewish  she said you know it is terrible what happened to the Jews in France  the Germans did it!!
Later I sold the store  I sold the store to another Jewish survivor.
He was known by eve rybody and loved by everybody  and nobody cared what he was he had the Jewish grandfather  or or the grandmother  or whatever it was  you know  it was unimportant.
I don't know if you know but in the Jewish relig ion there is a memorial prayer for the dead that is said on the festival holidays  on the last day of the festival holidays and it is traditional for the people who still have parents to not remain inside the sanctuary at the time that this is said  so they go out and they come b ack in after that prayer is said.
Were there any kids who were Polish  not Jewish  who you knew they were nice  and they were friends?
Unfortunately  it didnt happen that way  that the first two Russian soldiers coming into the camp  instead of hugging and kissing them  and feeling free  one said to the other the word  Evrai  which was like a bad way of saying a Jew.
And the last day  the last day before we left  she came to me and she said  ﬁI didnt sleep the whole night.ﬂ I says  ﬁWhy?ﬂ She sa ys  ﬁBecause I just find out  I just notice your number that you are Jewish and I am Jewi sh  too.
I told you before that one of the Jewish guys [indecipherable]   his name.
By 1942  came an order  actually  a letter given to the Jewish families  which said that all girls from age  I know it was from 16 or 18  unmarried women  should report in the Jewish school  I think  if I remember right  either five or ten kilograms of supply and they would be taken to a working place.
We were the last Jewish family in that little town  and she was forced to sell and move.
Senator Jourey the colleague with whom I wrote the articles when we returned in '46 right after the war for the New York Post and for the big book thereafter and for the Jewish Morning Journal  which had to be translated from my German into their Yiddish  he did most of the interrogating.
So we had a 40 club  and we had poets and writers  who taught us literature  Jewish literature  and we were performing there  and I won even a -- a prize for a poem what I was reciting  yeah.
And I think being a traditional  they had a very traditional relations hip  where he was sort of the power figure in the family and she cooked and kept house and was very proud of her motherly role  as many Jewish mothers are.
I mean  I -- Was there a distinction made between a Polish Jew and a Pole?
You know  what I find out is that -- well  maybe now there is a more a-awakening among the Jewish population toward the Holocaust and so forth  because I remember that some families were saying no  dont teach it to our children.
That mean s of the whole county  Jewish children could come by train  by bus  whatever.
The -- the Jewish kids had one or two of the families  and the rest of them were the Christian.
They used to send once a week a Jewish teacher to teach all of the Jewish girls  the Jewish religion.
From our...our guardianship and the Jewish Committee from New York let him accompany to Venezuela by a nurse.
I had to be afraid of my neighbors because some of my Jewish neighbors were taken away and here I was as a young girl  20.
There was two Hungarian officers and they are not supposed to hire Jewish children for the job.
Besides this  in 1947  in February  I was i nvited to convention of the Jewish Labor Committee in Atlantic City.
Well  it was not as frightful as some of the young Jewish people who had to go to the university because the Numerus Clausus  that was called the 10 percent  was very strictly observed in the universities.
And maybe not by choice  but I was made to feel Jewish.
There was quite a few teachers   Jewish teachers that  that my mother could pay that I could attend illegally  that was not legal.
There's a dozen of you Gentiles  Christ ians who want to beat up one of me  one Jew.
This Jewish boy threw himself on this Dolp and start fighting with him  fist fighting.
So there was a man who was in charge of the Jewish columns.
And he told me on the way that the reason for all the things that were going on was because I was Jewish which  of course  didn't mean anything to me.
My father was teacher at a Jewish school but they used to meet.
All the schoolchildren at Adas Israel  plus all the s-schoolchildren at the Jewish Day School heard the Madnas story with slides  with pictures.
I said  ﬁMaybe they were helping the Germans to find little kids  little Jewish children.ﬂ They were kids  they were adorable as I remember them.
It was  I think  was it Yom Kippur or was it  may have been Yom Kippur  we went to  because then there was no  no Jewish community left  no temple  we went to a Jewish service.
And one day  I find a soldier and I take a look by his looks  I says  \ Are you Jewish?\
Krishka [speaks Polish] it means -- in Polish it means Krisha a Jew.
Then the last trip was to Krakow  because they discovered my mother's various deeds that she did the swimming  and they had an exhibit of Jewish athletes in Krakow.
End of Tape 2 17 18 Tape 3 A. In fact  when we arrived to the Bishop's yard  the Bishop was aware that it was a special day in the Jewish calendar coming up  but he was not aware of the laws of Yom Kippur so when he saw my father and recognized him  and they embraced  the Bishop put to him the question  is there anything special Jews are eating on Yom Kippur.
The Jewish agency came and give some money to the guards  and they open the doors  and they have messenger inside the camp  a nd we escape by night  and we go to Tel Aviv.
Did you have Jewish and non-Jewish friends  did you live in a Jewish neighborhood?
After that transport  after transports were leaving and again  due to the Zionist youth organization and the Jewish management that always had to put toge ther the transport  they always were trying to keep some of us  the younger pe ople behind.
There had been no Jewish administrators before the n  so McGill was kind of opening up.
She spoke to them only in high class Polish and convinced them that she was not Jewish.
We had a Jewish man who killed...he killed two... He went into a bagel shop  and he killed the the owner and his son-in-law.
So Im – I have a memorial – that every – I know in the Jewish  after the d eath  you got to know when your father died  you have a date.
Yeah  I went to that to the it was a local community school  where I really became the for the first time conscious of anti-Semitism  which is interesting  because there were a lot of English people who really resented  I guess  us coming over  because they regarded us as German  and forgetting that we were Jewish.
When they put it on a dolly and and they came to the gate to take it to the other ghetto  to the working ghetto  and the Jewish policemen were giving them trouble - started asking questions: why do you need china?
They were -- it is very rare such Jewish people who were working with the Arabs.
And that book wasnt selling too well  and they had she had to change the title  to ﬁThe 20th Transport.ﬂ And what makes it so interesting  that in the book  in that what made in Belgium more people survive  because the underground  Jewish people  non-Jewish people  any kind of people were just one group.
How they could be so completely un-understanding towards the Jewish peop le or anybody else.
I'm bringing that up because I read not too long ago that when you immigrate to the United States  you have to say  I am Jewish.
The -- the Jewish community before the war didnt exist any more.
One more thing in the involvement in terms of the Jewish community in -- in The Hague; I mentioned  you know  attending services  but there also was a -- a Purim party immediately -- very shortly after the war.
And my parents told me that the Dusseldorf fire department was there in full force  and they were putting hoses on the adjacent buildings  to make sure that the adjacent buildings werent burning down  and they let the Jewish buildings burn to the ground.
I wore it in the office and when we had no Jewish clients it was covered.
Uh... someone who was...they had Polish  they had Jewish policemen ...uh...in our camp...  in our ghetto actually  to keep order amongst us  and they were evidently...uh... helping the Germans keep order during this ordeal of selecting the people.
Nobodys going to kill me because Im Jewish  you know what I mean?
I s this something you talked over with your friends  your Jewish friends?
Any snitching  you know  against Pole to the enemy or taking Jewish  anything which you do against the Jews  same way.
Well  they almost they almost all of the Jewish population of the ghetto almost went out to Auschwitz   unless you could hide  whic h was not very often.
And most of the people  it was a most of Slobodka was comprised of a Jewish population  middle lower class.
Like  I mentioned couple times that -- that we had those couple more missions as a Jewish group.
If there was a manifestation as you describe  of antiSemitism  the more reason to have a Interview with Peter Masters August 7  1998 47memorial there saying mostly Jewish  so that  you know  whats wrong with that?
And I did sp end much time with Volin sky who told me all about the problems with even names of some m ilitants  and I got microfilms and I was the man who brought to London a report   a Jewish Militant Organization  written after the ghetto.
One of the soldiers who had been in the Liberation Army in Lindbergh  a wonderful young man  Jewish  and we had stayed in touch with him and hed gone back to America  married a journalist.
And I remember  it was it's a village in Georgi In this moment it's a a really Jewish village.
Then all the people's homes  whoever was a Jew was brought there.
01:36:08 13 And Kastner  who was a lawyer   a Hungarian Jewish lawyer  de alt with Eichmann and pleaded with him to save this group of Jews to show to the world that what they are doing is not -- supposedly not happening.
So from a straight A student  she ridiculed me; oh  in the Jewish school they give good grades easier  dont they?
And my mother 11 who was a typical Orthodox Jewish woman with a shaytel 20 on and completely helpless.
When she gets that check back that she knew that she gave donation to the Jewish synagogue to Jewish causes.
And the Swiss didn't like that and so they told the Germans to do something  put a J in or whatever so that they can immediately recognize the passport of a Jew and then they can refuse them.
transition  you know  I got to be very active here in Des Moines : I was president of the temple; I was president of the all in one campaign; I was president of the Jewish Federation; I was president of the Iowa Sales Executive Club  and I been involved in many of the I dont say this with trying to impress you  but Im just saying that my transition into the culture of America was total.
They had fought indirectly for the Jewish people  to liberate them.
But we used to do all the services what the Jewish army needed there  we used to do it.
So we were being maligned and singled out and we didn't like it  but nevertheless we asserted ourselves in some way because when  when we went on outings with the Hebrew schools  we  we sometime carried the Jewish blue and white flag and we were taunted for that by people who were looking at us.
You know  I was probably part of the traditions that we did in my grandmother's home  but I wasn't aware that it was something Jewish.
In fact he even wanted me to go to a Jewish day school but my mother didnt want me to go because we werent that religious and in those days it was just orthodox schools.
His wife was German  not Jewish but German  but she was a nice lady.
I thought  a life  a whole life and a child  maybe that was half Jewish?
In the final analysis it didn't solve many of my problems of identity and the really point of explosion occurred when my uncle in about 1960 or so finally one day laid it on the table and said to honor my parents and to honor Jewish people in my heritage and so on  he says I had been baptized under duress as he called it and I called it not.
So -- Before we leave Israel  I wanted to ask you -- I know you have a -- a strong sense and had a strong sense of being Jewish?
The Jews had even a high school that was a Jewish high school.
Yes  I did go to the new Jewish uh nursery school which was located the same place as the girls' school was at that time.
And there  the government had accepted two or three--I don't recall whether it was two or three men--as officers  executive officers  of the Jewish evacuation of Cyprus.
So the other Czech children– R: There was one other Jew  I remember  but we both had to run for our young lives at the time.
And then it so happened that he comes to Stockholm and works with a Jewish businessman th ere  and he gets the story from Budapest what's happening ther e and so on and so on.
When we left the the four hundred uh Jewish people  we had all kind of different names.
The Jewish school closed  and so we were primarily at home.
And I reported to Whitehold Street  and there was a Viennese doctor  who said -- a Jewish Viennese doctor  who said  ﬁI now -- I realize  I see that you were in a camp and -- but  Im going to put on the paper that you are sick  that you are due for limited duty.
That's why we called it the Jewish Chaplain's Center for the Allied Command of Berlin.
Well  all I ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 17 want to say is that when I was 15  I joined the Jewish underground  the Haganah  that fought for the independence of the country.
Jewish people and German people were separated in the workplace also.
He wasnt a Talmudist but he knew Hebrew in the way a traditionally educated Jew knew Hebrew.
of -- of his deat h  but I remember a-around Jewish holid ays  they usually lighten their candle  or the light for -- for Yahrtzeit of him.
I can read it to you what I write there  because its in a foreign USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0036 23 language ﬂ it was in Jewish.
And  uh  we...my husband and I  we decided we go to the Jewish Council.
The Hebrew tabernacle is a -- a synagogue or a congregation largely made up of the German Jewish emigres that I had referred to before  but there are quite a few people like -- like our family  who came from other backgrounds  but who were Jewish as we ll.
And it's  I I I don't have no words to describe you the man  the niceness  the feelings that this man had for the Jewish people and always was the same thing.
He didnt know the Jewish community well  and he we nt to a rabbi.
When I really became conscious of that was when the stream of Jewish refugees from Poland cam e down south and went through -- came through Romania  and some of them tried to move further to the seaside to leave for Palestine.
There was place of trade between Aryan part of the town and Jewish part of the town  that was what people called ﬁszmugielﬂ. You know whats that --?
So  I  when I came there was the first  not only Jew from Poland  but the first Pole.
speaks foreign language here] I: And at the time  there were Jewish women wh o  who were  who supervised blocks and also nonJewish women.
For example  sometimes I would be called a Jew by little  younger boys in -- in the same class.
I spent a long time with the Jewish people and a few times with the Christian people.
I just know that when we were in Budapest  and we stayed in Budapest for two weeks in a la rge school  we came away from Cluj  about 300 people  300 Jewish people.
Oh  by the way  this English headmistress was delighted that she had people who were Italian Jewish  and so on  because she was somebody who wanted that  and so on.
Moldova  that part of Romania was heavily populated 20 by Jews  and by the turn of the century  many town ships in Romania and some bigger towns too  had -- a majority of their population was Jewish.
I maybe a stronger Jew than many Orthodox Jews are  although I don't follow the ritual  but I know I am Jewish and  and always be.
The ghetto  of course  they had to mention the ghetto  because theres only one kind of a ghetto  a Jewish ghetto.
You go in the evening  Zi d(Jew)  Zid they says - for Polish a Jew  because... but  religious people - my father was not that religious but he wear a hat always whenever... he pray every day  but he was shaving man.
The idea of using the synagogue shorter and living in this town  which was -- had quite a Jewish population  the idea was that we had to obey these laws.
The ghetto was in the area that my father lived in because my father lived in the Jewish community area where all the other Jews lived so I dont think they had to move but they did have other people moving in with them.
Some Jewish people didnt know  like I told you  I talked to the havara group  and it was like I was  you know  someth ing out of the blue.
If the j-jew -- the girl is Jewish  theres a par -- bigger possibility that the family stays Jewish.
We celebrated a Jewish festival  and we celebrated Christmas  and we searched for Easter eggs at Easter.
And he eventually became a -- got a degree of rabbi  which is just like a doctorate in Jewish studies  but he became a rove  he got the smeeha  which is the equivalent of a doctorate in rabbinical studies  I guess  from Yeshiva University and he now is -- hes a teacher in Westchester  in Mamaranak.
Th ey knew he was Jewish see  and was he thrown out.
And sometimes  you know  when you're a child you question  why was I born a Jew?
They sat down and they told us that because we Jewish  they look  not Jews like we  Jews that are the third generation they check.
I said goodbye to the  when my Jewish relatives went to the concentration camp.
It is -- I dont remember the details of it  but I can tell you that the location of it was very much in a densely Jewish area.
And  of course  the...the journey on the wagon from...uh...od to Wierzbnik was very unusual too because we were...we had to hide and we had to...uh...sort of...uh... pretend that we were not Jewish and the way we were doing it is  my father used to live during World War I in Germany for some reason I don't understand why.
Yeah  well that's what that served  but on the other hand  you had to be very careful if you  I'm coming to something th at I haven't mentioned yet  but the Gestapo employed a number of Jewish spies and if you met a Jew whom you had not seen sort of on a more or less continuous basis  you didn't know whet her that person was legitimately underground  like I was  or whether that was a spy working for the Gestapo and ready to hand me over.
Shortly after right after Kristallnacht there was already an influx of German Jewish refugees that came to Poland.
01:42 You did the usual things that when we went to the synagogue to meet other Jewish young people  that's what we did.
There was a book written by a Jewish fellow  I think from he was in DePaul University  who wrote the bo ok  it is a Holocaust business [indecipherable] Ah  I know.
Even though we say even though the Jewish religion they say God is the final judge  you know  God is the final judge  but and justice will come eventually and it did come eventually because the war ended and Hitler did not achieve what he wanted to achieve  so he was the final Interview with Jacob Wiener October 25  1998 21judge  but at that moment it was in the hands of the human court  with the majority of mankind at that time  because everyone was involved.
I start spreading the word...when somebody between the Jewish people...he he choose...again when he asked you who's god  immediately tell.
I don't know how old I was...maybe I was eight or nine and  uh  maybe I had an argument with a child or the child with me and the child called out  \ Lousy Jew!\
And so I thought that he was Jewish  and he maybe thought and I said to myself  no  after the war  I return.
Lots of them I never had the chance to meet  but yes  we do  because i-Italian -- once i-i -- once Italian Jew government accepted Jews to come across  they didnt send them no more in deep south.
And I did a paper on the Jewish ghetto as a form of either adaptation or a form of accommodation to the urban environment.
First woman I met there was a woman  I mean she was a prototype of an Aryan  she was blonde hair  blue eyes  porcelain skin  Jewish  had Eva Edmands 55 [Date not labeled] Page 55 been abandoned  not really abandoned  but left by her mother in Poland when she was two years old.
But it was fairly obvious that some of the Jewish leaders in connection with some of the Germans  the SS guards were aware of this in Krakow Plaszow  that Oskar Schindler is out there someplace deeper into the country of Czechoslovakia maybe or Germany  escaping further away from th e Russians.
The circumstances uh it was it was decided by th e Jewish leadership - I don't anymore recall the official name of it - which families shoul d go.
People who didnt know me at all  I I mean  I dont know that I looked particul arly Jewish  but they seemed to know I was Jewish  an-and I didnt I didnt let it bother me  but I mean  it was How could it not bother Interview with Eric Simon June 21  2014 22 sometimes very upsetting  you dont know how soon theyre gonna start hitting and Yeah.
Did you know if there were any Jewish children hiding in this compound?
He says  yeah but anyway  how come Holland save percenta ge-wise more Jewish people than Poland?
That evoked a tremendous outcry of prot est -- from the Nazi victims and from the Jewish organizations and from General Telfor d Taylor.
My father got the last Ph.D. given to a Jew from the University of C ologne.
But these kids USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0062 37 did not know  you know what I mean  any be tter  they were not brought -- I says  ﬁSo therefore  Ill make my biggest request to you   lets take the kids out of the camp.ﬂ And before long  which again I have pictures to prove you -- that point  if at any time you interested  but since we are doing it just for -- on a tape like that  but if you would be interested  I will be more than happy to supply with copies of the pictures  where  at this particular time  the Palestine brigade  or the Jewish brigade  as it was called  which it was attached to the British fifth army  came in to help  not the Joint Distribution Committee  and with their trucks  which you will see on the pictures  Ill -- Ill show them to you afterwards  which with their trucks  we took the kids  and we shi-shipped them out to a separate camp to make a camp  where they could be tended to the needs those youngsters were needing  and they were the first ones to be shipped even illegally to Israel  by means that we were not even aware of how  but they shipped them out  a nd they gave them the treatment that needed.
And we choder -- we showed them our numbers on the arm and then they still didnt believe it  and they ask us when the Jewish holidays are  which we knew and answered them and then they finally said yes  you know  and t-took us into the Jeep and drove us to headquarters  where we met the colonel  who instead -- interrogated us about the German troop movements and the camp  from Dachau itself  the location and the -- wh atever we knew about the camp  we told them  which wasnt very much  because within the camp  we had no knowledge what was going on outside the camp.
You live in a Jewish Relief Association Home in Bombay  India.
So Isaac Abravanel up til today is being honored by the whole Jewish community  where the name of Hasd ai Shiprut almost disappeared.
She did an awful lot of philanthropic things in our town and as a matter of fa ct  she organized camps for poor children  Jewish children and Gentile chil -- children.
We didn't know...then right before the holidays in 1943  right before the Jewish holidays  the New Year  the SS decided to liquidate the ghetto and they told us over the loudspeaker that the ghetto is going to be liquidated and we are going to be resettled.
And at that time we were not wearing our Jewish star yet.
And the interesting thing about her  as she became older and older  she said  as I get older  I become ever more Catholic  and ever more Jewish.
Well  in the meantime  there were some Jewish organizations and some Americans that came to  or were in Vienna and established some trains  and picked up where the public schools left off.
But after the war they told me that the man who owned the shelter had told my neighbor that he didn't like this Jewish girl in his shelter anymore and they never told me that until after the war of course  but my step-parents were a little worried because if word was going around that I was Jewish the Germans would come.
We didn't know whether they were Germans or Jewish or Americans or anything  so we went there.
We had a beautiful villa where the commandant  and they had Jewish help there.
Its  I mean its basically its nice that a Jew is doing su ch nice work.
Many Jewish people had to contact people abroad just to make arrangements or beg for support for a $50 ticket  you know.
But Herman said he was dating a Jewish girl  and the father had already died  thanks to the Germans  and the mo -- she was an only child  and he says  ﬁAda is scared  and her mother is scared.ﬂ So that was four.
So for them  the lose of their mezunka  the youngest is the mezunka  usually the favorite child in many Jewish families  but with me it was doubly so.
They had a Jewish Counsel to whom they always sai d  \ Look here  if you kn ow  be quiet now and tell your people that nothing is going to happen \  and so on and so on.
You were in there a few months– From the hospital  I walked out to a little town called Ampfing  and I met two boys  two Jewish boys  and I started talking to them  I just came out and ﬁWhat are you doing?
When the times were good  they didn't want to separate Jewish groups.
And we live in this small  charming little village near Nowy Sacz  which was in -- they have like 200 people of Jewish population  and I dont think they have more than thousand people entire village.
They were not occupied  but they were allies  and if they found that somebody was really Jewish  and was pretending to be Polish  and had no legitimate papers to be there  they did send some people back.
And then I became active in the many other Jewish organizations.
So I -- in -- in two cases I was the first Jewish American soldier who -- who entered them.
She took a liking to me  but I was still a Jew.
I -- I dont think the Jewish community on the whole was ready to even talk about it.
For instance  the factory where my father was working  his boss was Jewish so the factory was confiscated.
So uh I was uh uh...I reported that I was a welder  so I was uh then uh sent to a firm  to a German fi rm in Berlin uh which had a Jewish group which means at this time uh Jews could not work as in dividuals.
I went  as I said  to the only Jewish school in Amsterdam  theres only one Jewish elementary school to this day  its called Rosh Pina   and the high school is now called Maimonides  I went there.
And so  uh through Fritz we we got a letter in the right format saying that my dad had done work as a teacher for the for the Jewish Council  and uh was the was the famous commander  infamous commander of of that uh particular operation  let my mother go.
Interview with Lore Schneider August 14  2003 7 You mentioned before that you went to the Jewish school  did I hear you correctly?
The average individual  now of course  it depends on whether youre speaking to Jewish people or non-Jewish people  it makes a big difference  but the Jewish people are pretty well aware of what -- what happened.
Yeah  yeah  oh yeah  oh yeah  and Did he look Jewish?
My -- my brother did  you know  he was -- he belonged to organization called Betar  which was -- which I was kind of a -- unhappy about as I gre -- grow and understood because I was [indecipherable] to the right of center  you know  Jewish organization.
And I had an abur -- ability to -- a Jewish group started to build in -- in -- in Berlin  so I was a -- earning a little money by teaching Hebrew  and -- and I didnt pay for most of the -- for college.
I was extremely happy in sc hool  learning about Zionism  learning about -- about Jewish religion  and developing an extremel y fond love for the Jewish people.
There was a Jewish orphanage in Rome  for example  which had been taken over by the Catholics.
5 >> Edna Friedberg: And i n addition to the profound leap of faith and fears your parents must have had to bring a new Jewish life into the world at that time and place  eight days later they did something else extraordinary.
So when they called me to the board (another language spoken) He was cross and said ﬁWhat kind of a Jew are you  you cannot speak Yiddish.
You had children who were poverty stricken  who got free milk both at th e Jewish school and in high school  I mean  in secondary school  and it was embarrassing.
The - When they heard that I can speak German  their -- their -- their chief doctor -- engineer  was a German Jew  right away he took me  just because I spoke German and because I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0039 41 knew the -- the work  too.
I am not an Orthodox Jew  because that really doesnt speak to me.
But in Poland you can see which boy is Jewish and which not.
So maybe its time that we should cut off  but not being Jewish  and may -- who knows  maybe in 200 years will be another Holocaust then  and the -- and my -- our grandchildren wouldnt have to be killed.
They needed young girls to marry Jewish men so there would be a continuation of the Jewish people in Holland.
The Jewish community and leadership didn't even destroy the index of names and addresses of the Jewish community.
Interview with Magdalena Berkovics October 15  2009 53 Because he had very bad experiences in in Europe   and in Romania   because of his Jewish name.
And they both converted to Catholicism  but he said he was greatly influenced by his Jewish grandm other and aunt.
I didn't know about weapons   about...you know  what Jewish people...to say they write and teach us you don't need to have weapons.
Irving Hass: School for the Jewish people Š were no schools.
Just about as bad as the Poles who haven't seen a Jew  but they hate them.
10 And when you talk about  when you mentioned  you referred before to the Jewish pirates  did they literally force th e ships to go to... No.
Among the deportees  the bulk are local Jewish residents; but USHMM Archives RG -50.030*233 10 10 there were many who either came to visit with relatives from other cities  and also a concentration of a few Jewish families from little villages.
The Jewish people did not hold guns  you know what I mean  like this here  like  in other words like joining  like a lot of people join the rifle club or anything like that.
And I was amazed at why a lot of Jewish people.
On the end it was many  many Jewish children in this.
And then we went to -- in Lublin  to a Jewish fellow what ran away from camp.
No  because most of those Germans were Jews   and... but that didnt prevent them from being prejudiced against me too  and they knew that they were... that I was Jewish.
That  of course  brought about another dilemma  because Jewish male children are traditionally circumcised at 8 days of age.
SB: And the Jewish police  what did you think of them.
When she left she was Jewish she understood more or less became quite comfortable with that.
Cause he wanted the so-called pure Germans to have full cont rol over foreign exchange [indecipherable] supporting the national interest because the Jewish people would then take the foreign exchange and then deposit it abroad  right?
Well  for one thing  one of the things in the memos that I get  is  and the district director refers to this at considerable length  how we were probably the most visited Jewish DP camp in the zone.
And dote -- the German h ead as you know  a krippo [indecipherable] side  there they were calling Jewish and tried to get away -- all Jews had to work  the Jews were hiding  the Jews did all kind of things they wanted.
I have not 46 come back to my roots to seek the Jewish religi on  not at all.
In the meantime  finally  somebody went to Roosevelt  our president  and told him Hungary was the last country where there was ------ Jewish population  and it looks like that the Germans are going in there to kill everyone.
They didnt really want him in the hut  but Oskam  who was very influence -- influential in that area for the Resistance  and he was pivotal for them  had asked them to take in this Jewish kid  and so they had to take him in.
So wi -- my parents took her into a Jewish home in Br eslau  paid forever  and one thing I really like to menti on that  we had a lovely cook with us forever  she was a very devoted Catholic lady.
That was the only time I remember that we had some Jewish celebration.
Well  uh  you have to go back a little bit uh furt her because  because uh  nobody can forget that  uh  there was a life in Germany and a Jewish life before Hitler  and it was a very active life  especially in the community where I grew up.
Belges  you know  they didn't know for...they called us \ Juif\  [ Fr: \ Jew\ ].
When I was in Germany and my wife bought it over there - to light a candle - candlelights [candelabra] fr om silver - and the Germans stole... with the Jewish  you know  over there.
As a matter of fact  one thing I do remember is that I was excluded from the swimming club in Heidelberg  was excluded from swimming in November  October  1932 because I was Jewish  yes The city swimming pool?
And I could claim that it was lost  and I had a -- my apprenticeship papers which said who I was  and I tore it in such a way that the Jewish religion was torn off  but it would have kidded no one.
Just because I didn't want a lengthy conversation  I said if I tell him I'm Jewish  he's going to leave me alone.
Of course we were Jewish w hich was not a plus in those days.
And I went to Jewish committee  which was on Praga  on the other side of Vistula river  and I register  and people started nobody yet was coming from Russia  because later nobody yet was coming from concentration camp because it was later.
Its not only discrimination that youre Jewish  and believe me  Ive had some anti-Semitism  I havent had a lot.
We had rashes all  all over from the lice and but we have about three Jewish doctors in our in our in our barrack.
I will always try to defend Israeli causes  and Jewish causes  of -- of the -- of course  you know what I mean  like I said  I didnt want to give up Judaism in spite of Hitler  and I believe that whenever I think about it  Im -- Im more for than I was before ba -- myself  even if Im not in Israel.
Only there was all Jew what we saw  what worked with us in Westerbork.
Little Phillip and so I was in bad shape so she took me in and she called Jewish doctor by the name of Dr. Shin ewitz .
And the museum is sma ll now  very small  because we are sharing till the other building is finished  we are sharing the whole first floor of a building with USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0053 67two other agencies of the federation  with the library  and the Jewish Historical Society.
The German ﬁGet lost  you are not Jewish  get lost.ﬂ And I saw that he was  by the end he was kind of disputing with a soldier  I found out later that they had papers for him and a passport for him to go to freedom  and he wouldn't go.
Interview with Noah Roitman April 8  1999 74 Oh yeah  they they used to call me Nikolai because they jokingly say Noah is a Jewish name  youre not a Jew  youre not a Jew  youre Roitman is a is a German  and Noah is good  and Nikolai is better.
But a average person  if youre Jewish or Gentile  it doesnt make any different to me.
22 Jewish question (German) 23 Answer to the Jewish question (German) 24 East transport (German) 25 Deportation (German) 14 which Father gave me later on so I'm very much in the picture what was happening through those letters.
Why -- it came a time where they went and looked for Jewish men to take them to Sachsenhausen  and a lot of -- a lot of what he met disappeared in Sachsenhausen  so he disappeared  too  but not at Sach senhausen.
Very big extra -- you know  respective -- respected Jew businessman  respected by the -- all the community from the poor.
A Jewish girl and this was on my mind for 2 years.
We were  like I said before  the only nine Jewish girls  Jewish girls that were there.
And they pointed us in the direction of some people who knew some of the Jewish folks.
Well  how -- how was it decided then  that you would go to Israel from the camps [indecipherable] Well  since we were in a group  and we had all the influence of the Jewish brigade  we also had visits from Golda Meir.
And she says Harry wouldnt have wanted it any other way but that it says mostly Jewish.
Yes  ah  now  before this happened that they locked us as a political prisoner  my friends  who are -- who were Jewish origin  you know  Matchie Shapinski is a Jewish  but -- he was a Jewish  and I know that he was a Jewish  because I know who is a professor Batswell Shapinski  very famous mathematician in Poland.
That means Jewish people who obtained preference of ser -- supervising the Jewish working force and -- and used their force by beating Jewish people as well as the Germans.
They recognized that they were both Jewish women  and they both proceeded to Lvov  and not far from Lvov  they were caught by a patrol  by a German patrol  who was out searching for escaped Jewish boys from  from  from Janowska street  from the concentration camp.
Was not maybe very big  we don't blow bridges  but we start a movement to organize the young people to fight against the Germany and this movement start to extend to non -Jewish.
