By making me read ﬁStars and Stripesﬂ and also the army sent me to a school in in Germany  in occupied Germany  I and E school.
This was a Polish army  go to Iran  and this were went to Iran from England something to do  these soldiers  Polish soldier and a brigade  some kind of Yeah.
And if anything  they underscored what I was trying to demonstrate  because when I was a high school kid in Vienna  the notion that Jews would fight meaningful  strategic no  meaningful military assault actions seemed very farfetched.
I always kept that  but when I was in the Army in intelligence  when I was with the Fabian  unit  then I was under Hoffnung.
Now in -- before you join the -- the army -- the -- Im sort of curious about the make-up  you said that there were women fighting with you.
That was a bad situation because civilians and military -- if you see troops th ere  you have a right to shoot at them.
And we saw those military little planes coming down and all those military men in their white warm coats and there we were freezing practically  we had no  no warm clothes and I had a very big problem because the shoes that I had were falling apart.
And -- but we waited the Germans to come to -- to Wilna in 1939 already  because Polish army couldn t stand -- couldnt protect Poland  was too weak.
We stayed in Berlin for about six months and we were in Berlin we tried to get to the American side because we were told it was best from the Russian side with the Russians  eventually  like with cars  trucks  trains until we got from Poland to Berlin we did a lot of traveling.
But  soon after that  when the war we were liberated by the Russians.
We heard them marching  the steps of the German army was really frightening.
And I said army  and the fellow said to me  the -- the interviewing officer  obviously a retired serving officer  said  ﬁMo -- any -- any particular preference?ﬂ And I still remember this  and I laugh about it.
But once we we re in Ravensbruck  it was like they had appell  basically like reveille in the morning in the Army.
It was not an army  it was called uh...Arbeitz  Arbeitz  Arbeiten  I don't recall exactly the name of it.
Thats thinking about strategy  about military  about where the war is going.
So  but they start to repairing it you know  the faster and faster  the because they had no more men than we were  you know  the army  you know  the Hungarian army and German collaborators.
Because you're accumulating now thousands and thousands and thousands  tens of thousands of people  problems are going to develop  the Army commander says hey give me somebody here who can help me or without saying it  but on whom I can dump some of this stuff and I don't want to take the heat for it.
But they and they can displace wa no personal trains  only what how did that Military.
CUT] [SYNC TAKE 5] NESSE GODIN: Uh we were very much afraid of the MP's  because  you know when you are used to being afraid of the military  you really did not know yet  am I supposed to go here  am I m- not supposed to go here.
In nineteen hundred and thirty when I was 17 years of age  I was appointed to the United States military academy at West Point  New York.
The first thing that happened to me was that I was excluded from the army and on my military ID was written excluded as a Jew  and on the whole dimension of this document was written Jew.
I got a job in the textile industry  after I came home from the army  in in New York City.
When we came  at some point they had old barracks that had bunks.
We were just talking how is life in the army  what did you do today in the army  whatd you do yest erday in the army?
Yeah  apprentice building the cabinets and most of the things for army -- soldiers beds  soldiers racks for rifles and tables and benches for army supplies.
You know the accusation which is made against Ben Gurion himself and all the Palestinian-centered Zionist officials  that they didn't pay much attention to the holocaust  they didn't express their outrage at it  they didn't do very much except the Haganah  the military arm of the Jewish agency which tried to do something about it because  and these are the theories  because the Zionist leaders felt that the battle over saving Jewish life in Europe was lost  but that the battle for creating a state which would harbor whoever would be left alive had yet to be won.
He had a wholesale army and navy store and he was buying surplus 22 equipment from the government and refurbishing it and selling it in his store in New York.
The countryside where...in fact  there were a lot of German army horses that had been driven ahead of the combat.
And then the Army called me down for the draft twice and they examined me from stem to stern and found I was a very  very healthy specimen until they got to my eyes.
The next day or two days after I went to Hadera and I enlisted in the army.
We saw that everything whats happening with the Russian army  the victorious expelling  pushing the Germans towards towards the towards the Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 100 west.
Some of our actions were not of purely military nature  they were of kind of commercial industrial nature.
I mean  the masses -- This is -- -- soon found out we were Jewish  but the soldiers werent up -- you see  theres a big difference between the Nazis and the German army.
And when was Hein drafted into the army  in 39  or f -- or -- or 40?
Not a Gestapo post  it was a military post  a small one.
You have to realize Hitler was loosing at the Russian fronts and and all the Germans...the the German citizens were in the army.
He decided to volunteer to the army and he escaped from that particular town into the recruiting place of the Russian army.
Put us in jail  with the most undesirable element  Russian element who fought in the well-known Vlasov army.
Have them distributed to all members of the U.S. Army wherever any POWs ar e  compare them with this list  have them arrested  and report back to headquarters.\
So they sent telegrams to everybody telling them to report to their nearest military installation for further orders  which they did.
We were not -- it was  it was not dignified for Jews to serve in the German  army.
When Polish was destroyed and occupied by the Russian  a part of the Polish Army was evacuated in Romania.
I had to go there and from there  I thought I will go to Leningrad.
And so finally at the -- at the end of the war  his mother sent an -- an -- a still functioning army car to pick him up out of Theresienstadt.
And the Germans give them weapons  you know  to fight partisans.
Jewish people went all there until a Jewish chaplain from the American Army  he know about that  and he took the all this people  Brux-- Linkebeek.
This was probably around the time when the Russian Army was beginning to approach and was liberating some camps.
Maybe and this is speculati on  he got a little bit more respect because the Germans are very fussy in making distinctions between civilian life  military service  combat service.
The Einzatsgruppen were soldiers that when the German Army went into Ukraine or Russia -- remember  Poland  Ukraine  and Russia are big countries  each one of them.
23 Where  in -- When you were in the Russian army.
Next day he came with two Jewish guys from the Russian Army  also from Poland  they put on a full table money  they did n't want to touch it.
So it was Ukrainian was fellow was the guard  you know.
Secondly  it was guarded by military  American military police  by the MP's.
And we were there for about four or five days  because we were liberated by the Russians  I mean  this area was liberated by the Russians.
He was let go because he was a World War I veteran  fighting in the German Army in World War I. They let him go after four weeks.
I knew almost everybody because we were a pretty small group  so I knew almost everybody from the army and there was a young man in a leather coat standing and watching the...in the show case.
Normally  a a plain soldier didn't come and gave speeches for for for an army for twenty-five thousand people  so they gave me the biggest care and everything and I went to the hospital.
They were greeting Russian soldiers marching into Nowogrodek   and they were the orang Russian army was pitiful.
They have brought all their military people to Lichenstein where they were called up.
This mis -- the general population just rushed the -- the what do you call it  we call them kasir -- kasirna  which is the military complex that was right in our neighborhood where the m -- the s-soldiers lived.
If anybody's a hero  it's the American army that liberated us.
And we saw the road  and over there  the army  the -- the Soviet army is standing.
I -- I dont like to see foods wasted  and one time in the army  when I was a lieutenant  the mess officer got sick  he had to go in the hospital for a week  and some superior officer came to me  and said for -- he wanted me to fill in for one week til this guy gets back on  as a mess officer.
And occasionally he would go into these army groups  give them a haircut  play for them?
Now  how much did you know about what was happening to the Jews in Europe by that ŠŠ by '44?
And everybody was look and said  ﬁJan  where do you get those ugly boots?ﬂ He said  ﬁYou better shut up  thos e are American boots  those are the best boots I ever had.ﬂ 01:10:54 So your father  when you were growing up  would would talk with you about his military experiences?
Well  one...uh  we were uh  pulled out of that duty for uh  two weeks  a week or two weeks work in guarding a uh  large military prisoner of war camp.
But that is a other story why I didnt go  and Im writing this story that I didnt go  but I was in the army  and I was transferred to a different  special unit  and -- because they wanted that -- I told them from where I am  so they wanted I should be in the -- in the intelligence  in this section  because I knew the territory  I knew the people.
And we finished our engineering degree and gr aduated as lieutenants in the United States Army and went right away into service.
And eventually  on the 19 th of January  when I was liberated by the Red Army  I just went back home.
In his eyes  I was the only one what survived to be to tell the story  so I took...we got back to the same place where we were and we're waiting and three months later the army came  the Russian army.
People find that hard to believe  particularly I -- of course  later on in life  I came across a lo t of Jews  who f -- German Jews  who were not brought up Orthodox  who had all sorts of clashes  including the -- the people who -- when someone was in the army  and people [indeciphera ble] working professionally  and who had -- who -- who were -- whose -- had terrific identity crisis of -- of -- wh-when hi -- Hitler came to power  and when they were excluded from the soci al life which they had practiced up to that time.
And who was supporting your mother when you were -- when you were in the army?
Yeah  I dont know if they knew  because the allies  this was later on  you know what I mean  when the Russian reached there  to the Auschwitz and before  you had USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0080 91-- most of the camps were in the Polish -- in the pa -- in po -- in the Polish territory.
This man Mousekopf Interview with Samuel Marein-Efron May 8  2013 20 was Jewish  and he he managed to to since he it was important for the German war effort I mean  he was producing coating and fabrics for for the German army.
And I dont know whether theyre speaking German or -- somehow he understood what they said.
No  my mother was from Poland but my father was from Germany.
And later the whole city was destroyed thus  all of Warsaw?
And then I told hi m they did need me because they took all the men and the women  the girls  to the army.
Uncle and aunt did  the sons went to Russia and they came out of Russia with unders army  with the Polish army.
I dont know if Moshe mentioned that he was the chief cantor of the Israeli army.
And then I I I finished school early  that I went to the army  but but I didnt it wasnt for long because I had the rheumatic fever.
Here  I had this -- they were talk -- I heard them talking  the co mmanders talk about their Jews that they had in their -- in their -- in their units  who were giving them trouble in terms of not wanting to work on Saturdays  not wanting to eat the food in the mess hall  wearing a hat which was against army regulations and so on.
Well  I stayed in Poland  and I became -- I became a -- a commandant of -- o-o-over -- for a certain units for the county of -- of Poland -- of Krakow.
Right after I arrived in Nice  I was told th at as a hostile alien  being of a relatively manageable age  I had to go into military duty.
I thank God our men and women in the military and thank them for the sacrifices that they have made in protecting our freedoms.
Interpreter: He remembers that he was in Finland and that he was in active Army  because they were fighting but that's all he remembers.
I'm putting you in the Army hospital.ﬂ I was in the Army hospital for 3 days  and came out very healthy.
Things like that happened  but it sounds to me rather unusual  because many army officers  many pro fessional military men were actually arrested by the Soviets.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0066 28 But before you reached Dachau actually  you were liberated by the American army  by Pattons third army  actually.
We had actually maybe five or ten percent professional soldiers who were in the Polish army.
During the -- the aim was so well specified that in small towns  the military objectives in case the uprising  they're already designated for individual units  for individual platoons.
And we all went back  and I remember I remember Chamberlain  and I remember the French being the army wa s called up.
Then we had to depend on the German Army to bring our food in.
Is I want to finish my military obligation  and I want to visit Palestine.\
Fortunately the liberation by the Soviet Army of the Neustadt -Glewe camp   indicated by the second arrow  where Irene and Serena worked near the end of the war  left the girls unguarded   and they were able to make their way to Prague to look for relatives.
So what could I do  I wasn't in the army  but I bought war bo nds  but that wasn't enough  so they said  \ No  you cannot become a citi zen now  but after six mo nths  you can reapply.\
My father was a non-commissioned officer in the Polish army and after serving it  probably at a time when I wa s born  he also had to go periodically.
He said that it's not the same Army  it's not the same world; we cannot be friends now.
Foremen from factories  military or civilian  would come and you would be escort ed to one of the compounds  and they would make their selections.
We happened to g -- were both from Greece  and we worked together from the end of 1947 til 19 -- til 1949 where a law came that every woman that was married would get a discharge from the army.
Now the bed t hat we slept on  it was a cot and army cot  this particular camp  displaced person  displaced person's camp was built in a forest because this too was a concentration camp.
I have a question thats a bit of a sensitive question  about the army.
We ne -- we wanted -- specially me  I wanted to go to Palestine because if somebody would tell me that see  I was in the underground  in the Polish army  if somebody will tell me that I would be in Palestine  and I would be able to fight for a Jewish state one day  one day to have a rifle in my hand  and they will say the next day you will be killed  I will always agree .That if I could fight one day for my homeland  not for strangers  and then I could be killed  I would be very happy.
So when you set up the military government  the 79th Infantry Division  you wanted to set up -- where were you based for that year?
And then as the teachers left because they had to join the Army  we had women teachers  and the poor ladies  we made their life so  so difficult.
Was not military  only where the king we or the prince was living  it was a commandant  a German with a couple German soldiers  and thats it.
I was working in a factory and was sewing goggles for the army.
Our freedom is here   and against the German  you know  signs  against the Slovak army.
Now waiting for my aunt papers to come  and the army papers came  the army gave me referral to go to Czechoslovakia go pick up some passports and and an-and birth certificates.
Spent six weeks in a field hospital run by the American army.
Now  I never found out what that meant but it certainly meant that I had to get busy to find her  to get her out wherever she was  and to get both of us out  away from the approaching German Army.
It was called Hartford Bridge  and there were all the people that were there with the Polish Army was there  and there I went to English school.
The army transport ship  you sleeping in the cots 60 eight high  one on top of the other.
Theyd come up  the papers were dated and had the letterheads were from the Third Army Headquarters at Bod Toles which was south of Munich and it was very legitimate.
And so the first report was the report on the activities of the Deutsche bank  and simultane ously the Dresdner bank w -- very -- it was a -- where they -- a special unit  and I was part of it  and somewhere along the way I -- I was given more responsibility and -- and in some of the subsequent investigations  I was the chief investigator of it and so on  and in any event  the objective of these reports was that th-the -- the military government had to establish a policy on what is -- what kind of a bank is this [indecipherable].
Was  there was  because a lot of -- they didn't take everybody to the army because some of the numbers like here  you know?
He was away almost all the time.03:10:00 So  he even had to go back before we were allowed to go back because the Danes in Sweden organized a military unit in case there would be war over Denmark then they could have gone over and participated.
We get the military map  very accurate  you know  one kilometer was one centimeter.
I had a womans blouse  because I remember it  Army blouse  because it buttoned the wrong way.
I left the army in in in in Vienna and in May of 1946  moved to Nuremberg as a civilian.
The main thing that they worried about was the men because the men were afraid of being conscripted into the Russian Army  which was the usual procedure what they did and they were basing themselves on the First World War.
He was in the Pennsylvania home guard and then volunteered to go back in the army as a captain and ended up being overseas for a year and a half in the  well I forget.
I'd been living in the United States for a while  and being in the Army  it was nice to be a citizen  but it wasn't a terribly big thing.
Did you imagine yourself perhaps  getting sm uggled in there and becoming a -- a military -- Ye -- yes  yes.
Interview with Norbert Krasnosielski November 24  2009 36Now  and with the Polish army  I took part in the fight for Warsaw   until 45  May two  I fought in Berlin.
I went out with -- my friend had a brother who was in the army  and he took me this -- my first date  my first play.
Actually  I was an interpreter to a major who had that military gove r every regiment had a military government section.
The court was called a Military Government Cour t. Now  the Military Government Court was one aspect in which the United States government participated in the war crimes program in Europe.
And during lunch hour  after we had eaten our food  we usually marched  the entire school in military formation  through the streets of the neighborhood  singing Nazi songs.
But it wasn it was it was in Polish army  you know  and heres my picture I still have a lot of pictures of him from the Polish army.
They did not know that my father was in the army Interview with Barbara Syska October 22  2014 60ever.
And they were saying we are chasing the Germans  they are losing the war  stay here a few days later doctors will come and they will help you.
So anyway  it was a go -- I -- I came there  bu -- good thing -- also I had my dog on board  which was illegal by the army.
When we were first changing our names and becoming a different person  that was rather fun for most of us  because having been a hate object in Germany  Austria  Hungary  having been a poor refugee  as most of us were  having been in the labor unit  which was the bottom of the army  becoming an elite unit member and wearing the green beret and the parachute wings for which we had qualified  and then knowing we were risking considerable our lives  o-our limbs  carried with it a certain satisfaction and pride.
Maybe one of thes e days we're going to be liberated by the red army.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 >> George Pick: Right.
And somehow it happened to move a lot of shoes or somethi ng  and he bribed people with shoes because we didn't have anything  and he came to vis it us in the camp  showing his military paper and acting as  \ I'm an officer of the French army.ﬂ They let him in and he actually smuggled my youngest sister out on his bicycle.
One had a green jacket an-and black pants USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0012 38 and one had just civilian clothes and -- and one had an army coat and one had -- th-they -- they weren't like a -- an -- an -- an army  but then they started to speak Russian  you know and -- and th-they couldn't -- th-they were absolutely shocked.
military trucks would bring those civilian people to the camp  and we just greeted  and she recognized me  I recognized her  of course  because we were corresponding and exchanging photographs.
After the Berlin was divided  again our father being an American and being pretty much told that were going to come to go to Ameri ca some day  we went to a U.S. Army camp.
We were at hom e watching -- listening to the radio  watching Poland  the Polish army collapse -- not from the broadcasts  the Polish broadcasts  but 3 from broadcasts from abroad because the Poles didn't want to admit.
These prerogatives of the allies are gone  these prerogatives are gone  and we were in the middle of it  insisting and the -- and the federal government -- German federal government took it over - had to take it over  by they way I -- in all fairness to them  I dont think they necessarily resisted it  or it has to be checked because Im quite su re it -- that the principles of the allied -- of the American military government restitution law became German federal law.
Well  the Russian Army came close  took over just about all of Poland.
I believe when Lithuania in 1916 or something like that  he volunteered in the Lithuanian army to defend the...the country.
Halina Peabody: Well  because he was part of the British Army  we had the right to go to England.
There were other Romanians and Serbs  you know  these minorities who were not reliable and they didnt take them into the army as soldiers.
The Shanghai international concession in those days  was partly occupied by the American USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0036 24 Marines  by the British army.
Well  in 1943  this guy c-came on vacation from the German army  he had the SS uniform.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 8 My mom wasn't a war widow because my father was taken to a forced labor camp with the Army.
And all  and my old man from this man  mothers family were killed as they went to army and I found some letters my aunt wrote.
Or they were disenchanted with the German army  and decided we ll  this is not for us  and deserted.
So if the guy paid 70 cents for it  but he was giving me $150.00 because if he took and he sold that on the black market even for currency  not for a Leica  a set of china  he sold it for currency  occupation Marks  go right over to the Army post office  buy a money order in U.S. Dollars  send that money order home to his wife or his mother or whatever to put it in the bank for him  every single week if he didn't smoke he was saving $150.00.
But I want to point out that people who invented the -- a good example  in 19 -- soon after we got married  I was ordered by the army for 10 days to Brussels  from Germ any  to go attend the World Fair  and to visit the Soviet pavilion there  and look at some things.
So as a Czech citizen  because he was in the Army  he couldn't get papers.
If did not have Army supplies unless we could steal them  and you couldn't steal large quantities of gasoline.
So I find a military  you know a little military -----------  what the Germans eat in it  you know  the food  what you call it  how you call this  a little container.
And to -- we were -- went also for the er -- German army  an -- and I dont know how there were -- there -- fo -- for children  the -- the were on glass plates  and we made the -- they were pictures and we made the [indecipherable] waterc olors  because this was a -- the Germans did -- did allow that.
And we were caugh t. The Germans sent some airplanes a nd in a classical military maneuver  they bombed the entry  the exit ; everybody was caught in the middle and they strafed and bombed everybody.
Nobody could touch the Lipizzaner horses who were under the protection of the United States army  because Patton was quite impre ssed with them.
Right  General  the Army is repatriating all of them  but there is one group that the Army doesn't know what to do with and that's the Jews because they have no home.
This -- the German army patrol  they call it the patrol.
Ruhrgebeit   the manufacturing and the heavy industry  and the military.
11 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD >> Regina Spiegel: You see  in a certain time they gave us -- you know  after many camps I realized this was probably not one of the worst  worst camps  because we happened to have somebody who took care of us  who happened to be  even though he was a German  lieutenant in the army  he still was like he's human.
And at that time  the Jewish brigade of the British Army was operating in the occupied area  Russian occupied area  trying to get Jews who are returning out into Israel.
And besides  because my father had a...a store  you know  uh they were obliged to give to the state and to the army uh clothes and food.
And I was accepted by the military  put in a uniform  shared all the miserable food  and the training and everything else  and all of a sudden I had a home.
And what happens usually w -- in the military  and especially when you have a child  when you go overseas -- at that time we didnt have much in -- as far as furniture and all  but we had a little bit of stuff.
Yeah no  I yeah  we were in the in the Eighth Army   about yeah  it was only for a short time  eventually got into the Seventh Army for some reason or another.
After arriving in the US in 1950  Steve was drafted into the United States Army in 1953.
And now  let me explain  the labor camp had barracks -- had military barracks.
And Im confused because the the the juncture that I understand is that the military men are separated from the women  and they go off to the where the Polish units are Yeah.
Interview with Fa nny Aizenberg April 21  2011 42 And of course  none of them have ever been in the army  so we never thought that that would be the reason.
>> Bill Benson: So there you are now living in Belgium  your father is trying to make a life there for the family  but in May 1940  of course  Germany invades Belgium on May 10th  1940.
The first execution were by the  the team of uh the uh by the uh  uh small commando of German soldier who had came in the uh  uh with the rifles  and he would shoot--it was just like a  like a  like a military show.
In 1968  he came back home to Hamburg and he told the German authority that he's back from the war  he was in the Wehrmacht  that's the army  and he likes to get a pension from the German govern ment.
During my s -- years in the army  a-after the -- a few months after arriving in Colorado Springs  I got a call from the Red Cross  my father had an accident  he -- really he fell.
And  you know  they assembled the transport and  you know  you were...you were...uh...uh...you stood up and like the army  you know  in a column of 5  you know  and about 200 people or something like that.
It was the same  a pproximately the same relative like it was  the population was about ten percent and there was about ten percent was in the Army.
So they took us down to the camp uh...that's all I know is the name of the camp.
Brother  I told you was in the army in Leningrad yet.
I mean I-I mean more that Poland was so unprepared that it didnt have tanks of its own  that it didnt have modern military equipment.
The men have to go to the French Army  4 because war was eminent  and the women had to volunteer for the French Red Cross.
Three years ago  a group of Polish  Polish president and Polish military high officers and the government got into a plane to go to open a museum or a flag there  and that plane fell down and crashed.
And it -- there is a -- and there is a -- a report of somebody who witnessed  an engineer  American engineer in the army who witne ssed their surrender  and he relates that they were shot immediately after they disembarked in -- on the -- out of the trains in Russia.
And they gave us food  right away they brought in food  the same food what the army  the Soviet army took.
And I remember one officer ask me there was a kind of like a big group of soldiers what direction the Germans left.
And part of the deal wa s that among the German Army were these Hungarian troops.
It began in Boosoulouk  in the  in the very interior of Soviet Russia  where  where the majority were concentrated and there were about 5 000 people who made up this army.
Were there any Germans still around  or had they all disappeared?
And the...uh...they started to take every...uh...capable person who could perform any kind of...uh...work  they grabbed you off the street and they took you in one of the trucks and they carried you away to perform some kind of work for the army  whatever it is...cl ean the barracks or clean the horses  you know  whatever it is to...uh...uh...to make it comfortable for the army. (
First out  he took water  you know the military buckets with water  poured over my head and revived me.
I got military sar military background  and so I went to Warsaw to report that When you say you get back to health  what does that mean?
You are in the army at age 20 to age 50.
Oh  when  the  the military was in a  is  is a drawdown situation where they were pulling out quite a few troops from Germany and we reache d  my wife reached the point where she just said she wanted to be close to the children.
And indeed after the concentration camps had been liberated  the American military authorities worked efficiently and within 90 days the um the Belgians  the French  the Greeks  the Poles  whoever um whoever were found in the concentration camps who wanted to go back to their homelands were sent home.
But you are  I think saying  that part of the reason for the surreptitious nature of this effort to get Jews out was resistance by American military personnel  as well as the law prohibiting Jews from migrating to Palestine.
I said  \ In order to get me into the Army to go back to Germany  you have to declare war on Germany again and be losing.\
Did those with you in the army feel that there is going to be a war with Germany?
And I gave him the express the expression  the terminology to him in in in in in military words I dont want to express them to you  because they dont sound good Its okay.
This was in middle of December and till we were combatively uh pushed away the Russian army will come back in March.
And as I mentioned  my next door neighbor was a was an army officer  and my father and they and he very often spoke about the how the war was going.
Was there any kind of interaction between the soviet army and the US Army A little bit Do you recall ever meeting More by the officers not much by us.
We had no money  we had no clothes a nd we were very weak and we came there and Chaim started working and they had the -- Chaim had to go in the army  the Russian -- in Polish army.
I can tell you with authority  because when I was in the Ministry of Defense  I studied the German Army.
And I said to him  \ I was in the army with a young guy by that same name.\
The Army -- they had uniformed Army  they had yellow around the arms -- armband  yellow.
You know the military  you ge Ye oh  okay  he was in military.
As a matter of fact  the Red Army soldiers came into the building and then down to the cellar  and there were a couple of people to move.
I am expecting a contract from the government for  I believe  3 000 uh...coats for the army.
In January of 1945  the Sov iet Army liberated the 800 remaining Jews from the Lodz ghetto.
When you say it was an army  you're talking about a partisan group or the Red Army?
And when the United States declared war  he became he fought in the American army.
Appointed by President Truman to be Chief of Prosecution Counsel for the United States for the International Military Tribunal.
I spoke German at that time because I  my grandparents spoke German.
As a partisan -- Bill Benson: She enlist ed in the Russian Army.
I I I would say a military junior college  I dont know.
And I came into my -- my boss  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0031 83 Shamus  and I told him  ﬁListen  Im back in the army  I want to go back to work.ﬂ And the law stated that if you were drafted in the army  you must get back your job.
Okay we made something the German army could use  but did we have another choice?
No hair  so he must have been--looks like an army picture.
Was a military paper from the military service saying -- and this was tha -- six months we -- after the -- the massacre  in beginning of 42.
It was  uh...I retreat from  uh... with the whole army  the Romanian army  from this point 'til Roman--t he city Roman.
I did not really  although I myself felt if I had been liberated in January  like some other people did  I'd have been volunteer for the Russian Army and I would have been the first one to go in to fight.
The troops without the officers were surrounded by Soviet troops  were disarmed and forcibly forced into a Polish Army under the Soviet command  which had an obedience to a Soviet puppet government in Moscow.
Every Swiss up to a certain age had to spend three weeks in the military and the chief of the hospital was due to leave and all he had was one resident to care for the eighty patients of this small district hospital.
They had supplies of the Russian and Polish army -- was still brought in by horse-drawn carts.
So that was one -- and as proof of the veracity of this story  my father gave to this man  who was a very decent man  who happened to be in the army  a picture of mine  a photo of wh en I was about 11 years old.
In the fall of 1952  all the reserve officers got a letter saying that your th-the you were extended  your your fi your army still had a five year dur as of reserve officers  five years at a time   you had to renew every five years.
And its Soviet Army telling us: The Germans are losing the war; we are chasing them; we are going to run after them ;a few days later some medics will come and help you.
The -- the -- the -- the -- the -- the struggle for survival in -- on a very brutal military conditions was so extreme that looking back was really not very useful.
It wasn't the main Polish Army cause that was really - It folded under the Germans.
He found out that I had a cousin in Russia that was a colonel in the Army.
When the petition was made  like everybody else  I was draft in the ar -- drafted in the army  and I was in the army from the beginning of 1948 til July 1949  a year and a half.
We could see on the outside how all the German tanks and trucks and army and ammunition and machine guns are all pointing to the ghettos.
Uh .. they burned down the camp because they thought that all the barracks had been so polluted and so full of excrement and bl ood and whatever -- there was just no way to preserve it and they moved us into a nearby um .. what had been German army camp  in fact  when I went back to Bergen-Belsen -- it is again a German army camp.
For a different reason I was in Germany with the United States army.
We really hoped and thought that being...being Xo the volunteers they were and respected before the war  the Lithuanian army who really directed most of these...uh...I don't know how to call it...uh...would...would really let them free  but they didn't.
So he was in the army about a year before the -- Yeah.
My father was -- when they round them up  when the German soldier passed  he give him some kind of a salute  so the guy looked at him and he asked him  he said  \ Are you a military man?\
>> Bill Benson: During that time after your father had been conscripted into the Soviet Army  do you know if your mother had any contact  had any word from him  any idea where he had gone?
So  with the Orthodox  we had no common ground   they -- they didnt do what the army [indecipherable] told them to  to say it in English  but they -- they rattled  and they shugon  and they we nt through the motions like the Orthodox do  and I didnt do this at ho -- in my hometown in Germany  and I didnt do this here  but [indecipherable] just went along  everybody chanted certain songs.
The toilet facilities were all army centered  built on the up above the ground  and two holes in the ground.
So  you're trying to control who's in the camp  but what you're saying said  people are coming in  maybe eight months after the war has ended  and the U.S. Army doesn't want them to  or UNRRA doesn't want them to 04:23:44 No  no.
But Yigael Yarden called me  and asked me yeah  I will tell you  I have two papers on the pable table  to sign that you are free from the army  and the other to sign do you want to be anot her two years.
>> Bill Benson: Will you share with us  Gideon  what you told me about -- to keep you safe -- because  at that time  of course  the German Army is hunting the partisans.
For instance  I...one of them was a former high o fficer of the Lithuanian army and I thought what what... was his name...so I said   why did you volunteer?
I was ready to go back when I met two other Jews who ran away from the army.
During the First World War  both my grandfathers had served with distinction and many of their siblings served with distinction in the Austro -Hungarian Army.
The reason for my being sent there  since I was the first Jewish chaplain ordered to the European theater  was because our first American troops were stationed in Northern Ireland  and an armored headquarters  a corps headquarters  and uh two infantry divisions  and I immediately began vis iting every camp  every military camp to search out Jewish soldiers and officers  and to arrange for services and for whatever  whatever other service I could render to the soldiers of Jewish faith.
And then he -- and then he -- at the time  he may have also ready been -- he was eventually a prisoner in Moscow  the German army -- he was in the German army and he was taken prisoner.
It was l0 o'clock so maybe we were standing  not working  talking  a German  not military  who lived there with a big stick  he came and he wanted to hit so I  you know  I never got hit otherwise  sure we were b eaten  terrible.
I went to the Army on February 13th  1942  about a month and a half after Pearl Harbor.
They 41 didn't want to stay in--because my mother saw all those dead people  you know  when she walked in the street for her--this street  her brother  who was no longer there  her sister  her brother-in-law  her nephew  I mean  she only saw ghosts and she had a lot of people of her family that were killed so she didn' t want to stay and my sisters  who had done such a beautiful job in the Je wish army  had become very Zi onistic and so they went to Israel and they stayed there.
So th ey asked  oh  these people offered us a deal  but they did not want to do it during the day because they were afraid that the– Jordan had the best military force  the Arab Legion  trained by the British and they were afraid that they were patrolling there and all this and it was a serious crime to deal with  with Israelis.
Theres a there there was a Lieutenant Stein  a German Jew  who was lucky enough to flee Germany before he was brought to the concentration camp  or to Auschwitz   and he came back with the American army  as an American lieutenant  Interview with Niklas Frank June 6  2016 67 or something like this.
So he did call the police and says  \ Well  I'm leaving for a military service.
So  we had I was like they asked me first if I wanted an army occupation and I didn't want that  I wanted Interview with John Truty 10 to get home  the heck with that.
And they sent  the Germans sent in a team to make a surrender.
Of course there is a Czechoslovak army also in  in the west who escaped in '38 and '39.
However  it was -- in the Russian Army to see women  it was no novelty.
Then  second  was a challenge  the challenge to be in the army among your own.
And I believe that that blowup of that mine  that it exploded on a truck that we found out the next day was already that the Red Army is reaching.
They started having German army coats made  and money was coming in.
I was a bit unhappy because I had less power than I had when I was in Germany where thing were done at my beck and call where I could travel and had my travel order card as long as I was in the army and in uniform.
Every one group had a leader and we made a military establishment.
the eastern part of Poland   and then its a military Right.
What the Home Army did  they put him in a an orthodox kind of a canvas sack.
The next morning  suddenly all streets were full of Red Army running and moving from Kovno  and all streets were just loaded with them.
Was there any public rush -- recognition in Engl and of the existence of the Jewish brigade in the British army?
And fortunately the interrogator was a Swiss -- a Swiss speaking fren -- a French speaking Swiss -- Switzer -- Swiss military who did not understand German  so I translated for the other guy  who didnt speak French -- for my companion.
When you have to go in to the army  you got a [indecipherable] its not not a like a garage  but its a opening A guard post?
And just now I heard  two w eeks ago  he went to Israel and asked to give him some off in the Army.
It turned out that during the war he was in Hungary and he had a Hungarian wife.
So I ran back to my dad because my dad received then to go into the army  to be in the next few days near Warsaw at a certain post.
So nothing happens  nu -- so I figure they are going to send me out before I have a chance to get out of the army.
Then also my father's youngest brother was also taken for the Russian Army.
You were ca lled up for the Army and you said that you were a conscientious objector?
I told them  listen my father was a soldier -- I made it up-- I father was in the army and he was killed.
You know partisans took whatever they needed and they said take this horse and run away from here because the Germans have to come here  the army  and your life is not .
We read Hungarian literature and as a matter of fact I have uh a cousin in in in Budapest who's in the Hungarian army  which happened to be true.
So I land up  and they tell me I am now part of General Mark Clark   who was the commanding general  of whom I knew his aides because I traveled with them most of the time in Italy  the headquarters of the Fifth Army.
Although Marcel officially retired from the Army in 1994  he remained a consultant with the Army until 2010.
The first time I saw like soldiers dressed in uniform  like it was from the Red Army  the way they left us.
I was at the place in Munich   was called the Funkenkaserne  it was once an army p-post there  the electronic equipment  or whatever that was called in those days.
Somewhere on the other side  and eventually we were stationed in Barletta  which is just south of Bari  big port  and we were with the American fifth army a nd the British eighth army.
But one evening--night rather  mi ddle of night  the Russian Army came in.
Why would they -- people of military age certainly may have been more skeptical  but young or old or woman or children  nobody felt that they were going to touch anyone.
There were about 25 000 Belgian young men who became part of the German Army.
She said no  it's not for us to be even tempted to be profiteers of the victorious army of which you are a member.
My sons went to a military school  like childrens military  the -- you know  the grade school.
And when we got to Israel  then the Army for women wasn't like today  automati c and obliged to serve for two years  the boys three years.
I understand that he was drafted in a Russian army  and he was figh ting in World War I  and the first days or first week  he was taken prisoner by Germans  and he spent four years in Berlin  in a prison camp.
And I talked to one Austrian fellow with Austrian insignia in German army because I speak German.
There was a Polish military outpost because it was so close to the Russian border and he also engaged in some exports of orchards were nearby so he would export apples.
Behgin over there - He was in the army over there.
Uh years ago  BBC London brought me over to uh to London  because they had a show  \ This is Your Life \  of one of the prisoners who interesting enough had been a member of the British army  had survived Dunkirk  had had been had been had been taken prisoner at Dunkirk  had been I don't know in how many prisoner of war camps  had tried to to escape and unfortunately could never make it  and he was a daredevil.
Which is a military intelligence unit  German military intelligence unit  very much like ours  detailed interrogation.
And we believed we are kind of parade army and we will be used when Germany is defeated  we will be used as the as the core of the Czech army  which will move back to Prague  but when France suffered one defeat after the other  in May 1940 we were well-equipped  or relatively well-equipped and we were sent to the front and we were...we were positioned uh east of Paris as part of the army to defend Paris and the front was broken and we retreated.
So  the Soviets from their Interview with Algimantas Gureckas October 14  2010 82barra from their military bases in Lithuania came  the Soviet soldiers to that place  dismantled the plane and brought it to the ra ilroad station and took it.
On the other hand  AK  which is the underground organization to which I belonged  and that means -- AK means Army Krajowa  which is home army.
And we found out where all the china factories were in Bavaria  and we worked out a deal where the military government would arrange for the local  for the uh kreis Landsberg  not the city  to pick up the tab  if he could get it.
And so we found out that there was a prisoner of war camp where they had a lot of prisoners who were capable of doing special things.
So  I re-enlisted and lo and behold they went and sent me back to Germany. [
So when I -- when they came  I spoke German fluently.
I came over  the American military and the Air Force is the one who flew all Hungarian re fugees over.
On two levels  first of all the most important level was the military preparation.
And s-somehow you know  at that point  when Lithuanian army marched into Vilnius  the country became split personality  the people said now we are going to celebrate  we are going to worry tomorrow.
Yeah  I mean  the atmosphere  there were st ill a few German workers in that Jewish department  actually  some even women  they had started to use women in factories  which used to be also unheard of in Germa ny  but simply because of the labor shortage after the war broke out  since you know most of the able bodied males  of course  served in the Wehrmacht  in the army.
And also was news that  you know  the military bases  Soviet military bases will be introduced in Lithuania.
Her husband was Jewish  and she had a choice to leave or to not to go  because her grandmother and all of them were Hungarians  but they were officers in the Army  and she had a choice.
And so you were in the Polish army when you were in Russia  also?
Now there was a restriction put on by the International Military Tribunal.
So I told him we were on a field hospital from the army and now we gonna go.
Anyway  once they were drafted in  they were under military rule.
But during World War I  my father volunteered with the German Army.
If they want to maintain their observance while theyre in the army  they have to follow the rules to the letter  not deviate  theyll be no deviation.
I had  I had  above all  I was an American army officer.
There was nothing else there but they gave blankets  one underneath and one above you like military.
Oh  here he -- here is very interesting picture  he was in the army as you know  during the Korean war  and he was a company clerk  so here he is in uniform  and doing a very good job.
Most of the people in the camp -- they had  like  Army ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 23 barracks  individual barracks.
And but they dont before  they dont ask me even to sit down on floor  like this you you get to the and some military sergeant from milit German military walk  and look at me and told no.
And he helped me -- do you know  he was so worried that something happens to me  so a whole group of people came with me of the Army.
In 1949  when we -- truce was proclaimed and the legitimate state -- govern ment of Israel was established  when the elections took place  I was released from the army .
The non-officials  the falsifications  the printing jobs  the...the military there  what...what we used...uh...I don't know...uniforms  guns  and so on  they were kept somewhere else.
But during the night from the 7 th to the 8 th of October somebody knocked on the door and it was an officer from the Czech army because they had some of the soldiers that were billeted in our village.
They had fo und a circus horse some place  a pony  and -- because much of the army was s till horse-drawn.
She had Marvin who was in the army  very good looking and I only saw his pictures.
I had doctors with me who kept me very well posted and we deloused every prisoner in the camp with DDT powder  and those people  and we called in two clearing hospitals  big hospitals  army hospitals  and anybody who was ill they were confined to a hospital.
When the war br oke out  of course  with mobilization  we also had to report to the military  but we are immediately discharged as not fit for service as being Jews.
A cargo boat  or an actual -- 67 No  it was a boat that was used for the U.S. army originally  for -- so it was not a -- a cruise boat  but it had berths for people to sleep.
When you got that that ticket to go to go into the army or whatever  the labe forced labor  you just to right away  give a no couple of hours an d you had to go.
Around...I think the thirteenth or tenth of January  when the German army was completely in retreat  I get a phone call from the Commandant from Krakow...means the high uh Commandant of the military uh military in Krakow  and he said is this the firm and Krause.
And we were right near the Bavarian headquarters of General Patton  who had been appointed the military governor of Bavaria.
He was more afraid Leist was more afraid of Gestapo than he was afraid of us  the underground army.
And during this conversation I saw on the other side of the street a uh army elements  a pa...army patrol  and so I called them and the patrol came and it was commanded by a lieutenant who commanded thirty men or so  and I said look  th ese people want to arrest me and this is my name.
Interview with Shimon Schwarzschild April 23  2017 124 I thank you.
By the way  in Israel  I am also told while women served in the military  this and that  that the country was very macho and that men controlled everything.
Well  when we were with the partisans  we didnt hear either you know  from the Russian side.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 14 >> Nat Shaffir: Right.
I asked her what she w ould think if I went in the army.
The Army I was so proud of  you know  the calvary with their white gloves and the beautiful pasture with the horses was disengaged and here we were under Hitler.
Some of my close friends from Zarki  that little town by the farm  they were killed by NSZ and by the K. which stands for the Home Army.
Later this employee had to go to the army and then father was alone.
This is a a a military place  whereby they check out new t hey Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 109 check out prospective soldiers  you know  health-wise and whether they have TB because there were many with with TB  you know  from those that survived.
Well  I was -- I was in the infantry -- Yes. --
I had no idea where the Russian army was standing  and so forth.
And where did you do -- The Polish army I was only a ve ry short time  til we came to Israel .
We buy all this and pay you the whole price and you have that for military purposes.ﬂ And so I had in my hand...I had the promise that they would get the money for all..for all my debts.
So I got in there and I would have stayed in the army if I would have been transferred to Germany  but not -- not to Korea.
And I and I joined this infantry unit  one of the last to go to Europe  actually  and oddly enough  yo u know  was a late arrival  I was put into Pattons Third Army  which had one of the dreadful infa ntry scores casualty scores.
Uh  I want to emphasize that while Poland had a powerful army  they did surrender in 19  20 days.
And the only reason I got along with the army  because there was some people that were born in this country of Polish parents  of Czech parents  of Slovak parents and then I could communicate with them.
If you cant speak Yiddish  or your own language  you dont have your culture  what kind of -- you know -- Did you feel very Jewish when you were in the army?
And he was back in the army  he was in the intelligence service  military intelligence  and he was very close to Marshall Pilsudski .
In Memorial Hall  the concert hall  was used -- he volunteered for the Army but there was such a shortage of doctors that he was rejected.
When something Interview with Ezra Sherman May 16  2014 102start  we used to put it together and and then in the f before the declaration of the state  in May 15  48  when Ben Gurion said  we became a legal army.
Many Russian trucks  they Interview with Abe Resnick September 22  1994 24 right away they they they start abandoning their military supplies  an d military barracks  and and they they just try to move eastward  you know  towards towards Russia .
But he was later -- Commandeer Laser  he was smart  hes a miltil -- you know  military man.
He was a law student  he had be en in the Yugoslav army  yo- you know  you had to do your year.
But it did not go to a concentration camp  it went to another camp  some kind of camp  a detention camp where as Poles we were held over there  but there were not like guards  they gave us to eat  they gave us cots to sleep on and we had like a army blanket even to cover ourselves and I remember that my mother said  this is no good  I dont like this business here  you know  with the Poles theyre going to do something with them also.
But in  in military training  the soldiers are trained to escape.
When he stopped on the way to Guzar which was near the Afghanistan border  thats where the Polish army made  accepted their recruits.
He was able to comment to me about that  and he 28 said it was really like being in a barracks in th e military  and I think he was trying to compare it to World War .
I dont know if he could read or write Russian but he certainly could speak Russian and he knew German.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 14 Anyhow  that was the last time I saw my mother.
And the Germans made their darned best to utilize to their advantage General Lassov's army  so that garrison  while it had I am sure some Germans in it too  was basically Ukrainians.
And so I understand that  but s but I I joined the army  basically right after I was 18  and went to basic training  Fort Bragg   North Carolina   and then they send me to I was a radio operator they send me to radio school in Oklahoma for four months  because I was so good at that  they were going to use me.
So the Yugoslav Army was just whoever was there was taken to prisoner of war camps.
And they marched us  and we were basically running away from the oncoming Germ an army  surrounded by French soldiers.
It USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0013 215 was lucky when I married Victor  that his family was affiliated with a Reform Temple in Brooklyn -- a rather well-known Temple  with -- Rabbi Steinback was his name  he was a poet and a writer and an army chaplain and he was also a very inspired type of clergyman  you know  he talked poetry and he -- even when he married us  it was  ﬁWhat a -- what two beautiful names  Regina and Victor.
Th e Germans invaded Poland  and my father  being a physician  had to join the Polish Army.
And they had this big factory there  very successful  and his home really -- which was also one of these beauti ful estates  almost in the center of York  his home was sort of the rallying point for all of us Gans and related families from the American and British army  who happened to be in England.
He I think Leo was in tou he was in the American army  Leo was in French army  so I I dont know where they met or where they got contact.
If you get any adverse pub-publicity for the U.S. Army career goodbye.
So in this manner  many refugees also arrived in Israel with...uh...with false...uh...army...uh...army papers  army documents.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 24 There was one German.
Then they took my husband  the Lithuanian army took my husband  they  to the army  because they thought that theyll fight.
You should be too much with the hiding because the army is going there.
Later  the Jewish officers lost -- lost their military rank  and on a -- every man had a militar -- a military book  and with an enormous stamp ZS  zhido zsido --- Jewish: out.
13 That was like I said  that we fe...we h eard already noise of the...of the Red Army approaching.
Not to the Army but they were treated like they were in the Army.
So I came back home and just was waiting until the Lithuanian army will be reestablished  we will be mobilized and well be sent to fight the th e Soviets together with the Germans  just like Finns  like Hungarians  Italians  Bulgarians are doing.
And they had to do all the dirty work for the Army.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 23 >> Bill Benson: And there you were in Kenya.
And Poles  Polish army and civilians were defending Warsaw for several weeks.
The Lischka case was about his high responsibility for the fate of the Jews of France  the German who had helped with the Vichy government had decided the arrest and deportation of the Jews from France  76 000 were deported  and after the Achenbacker case we learned that Brandt was signing a new treaty with France in order to obtain the possibility to dash the discriminaters of the 200 sentences after the war by the military courts  but there were no ways to sentence them because as German citizens in France they asked to extradite them  but as German citizens they were not expelled to France  at this time the French Military Courts could still sentence them  and the French after the war had in a first review asked the German not to take care of them because they were afraid that sentencing them  in Germany in military courts in absentia  to life in prison or to death  but never caught  but Germany sentencing t hem to life  so there was a kind of blocking therefore no sentences in France or Germany.
I thought that I would probably go to my grave  sh-shaking over a military person  which of course is not the case  I mean  because you know  once you get over the original fear.
And  of course  the German women were... were military woman in uniform--very huge  powerful women.
My father was then teaching military government and had been evacuated from Europe.
My husband was in the in the official army  but then he decided to leave the army  and we lived in a remote place  completely alone.
Because as soon as I got out of high school  I was in the Army.
I had pictures from my husband from the Army  and my husband says...he was very sc ared from the Russians.
Well  the firs t confession of Strope and it is in military style  he reports.
But then she worked what was called  it was they made receiver for the Army  everything was Army oriented.
He was hiding someplace  and we had 4 sticks and a blanket ...uh army blanket.
He had the sister and the brother  and his sister was killed in the ge -- during action in the ghetto in Lvov  and his brother  1941  the -- when the Russian a-army retreated from Lvov east  he -- he joined the Russian army  and we never heard from him.
The Russian soldiers  and the Russian Jewish officer wanted me to go with him to Russia.
There were three barns only; there was an 27 office and we saw a military kitchen.
And one day  she had a meeting -- parlor meet ing  and General Levine  who was a Jewish doc -- man  who was a general during the wa r  and he was with the army  American army  and he was with one of the units that liberated one of the -- I dont remember  Auschwitz  or Buchenwald  one of the concentration camps.
And tell me a little bit about your army service in in Israels fight for independence.
Only with the army when I came to wa -- I came to Washington.
Very shortly I was pregnant with my first son after he was out of the army.
The army  of course  provided us at that particular time  I must say  with blankets  and so on  because they couldnt rebuild it -- the -- the military academy  but they gave us help.
WZ: Just to include in yo ur record: five or six statistical number s  in the 12  in th e 13 trials  the 12 plus the International Military Tribunal  199 were tried  there were 36 death sentences  23 life sentences  102 prison senten ces  lesser than life  of course  and 38 acquittals.
I was born in Lublin   obviously  in a hospital  but we lived in   where my father was some kind of a official for the Polish army  or so.
When we tried to get relief  uh  in that so-called \ Lazarett\  [Ger: \ military hospital\  or \ sick bay\ ]  they just took some benzene  uh  and rubbed that sore legs that we were screaming from pain.
And the Red Army used to supply dances  sort of in playing  and it was  you know  that was part of their propaganda  how Stalin cares for the youth and Stalin loves us.
You were in the army for four years  living in Israel for four years?
There was the Israel soldiers which are serving in the Bri tish Army.
And so when when my father starte d working for the military in in in Lodz  we moved into a military build ing  an-and that I remember.
And I spent  as a doctor  one year in the Polish Army.
The war breaks out  1914  he volunteers -- that you should tay9 to a Dutch child -- he volunteers to go into the army as a medical officer.
About two years ago  actually through the museum  I met a woman who was a US Army nurse 20 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD who may well have taken care of my father when she was there with the US Army.
And my older cousin had just been discharged from the army the day before I arrived  so there wa s such turmoil in that family  and I felt that I did not fit in.
Except that in January 52  15 months after I came to the States  I got drafted in the United States Army  because I ca me as a -- with my intention of becoming a citizen  so I was qualified for the draft.
They would take a lot of young people...very seldom Jews because Jews were already rounded up and and they were in camps  but there were a lot of Russian  Ukrainians and Polish young people and they forced them to go to Germany so they could work on their fields  because the German soldiers were not home.
Trains were going maybe once a week or so  so you had to hitchhike  and -- with the soldiers  with the military or with farmers in trucks  or just wagons with horses.
I says  your kids were playing up in that camp during the war  the whole time  the kids were up there.
My cousin came and put us in touch with a Jewish agency.
As far as building the underground movement  the resistance movement  there  there was  there were those different groups  as I say  and those groups worked really in their own direction  very often interfering with each other  getting missions  they were getting BBC mission  mission uh  uh order  and sometimes two  two groups were given the same mission  I mean it was very  very messy  until deGaulle in 1942 decided to get rid of all those differe nt factions and build the Secret Army.
But before that  when you thought we're the last Jews in Europe or in Poland-- Yeah  Poland  yeah.
He was studying  he had to go in the army  he was in the air force  and -- and we heard about that.
Joined the briga joined the army  basic training  Camp Blanding   Florida .
I went to West Point back after I graduated both from Harvard and from the military academy.
Now  the Soviet press  to my knowledge  did not write much  because they didn't have correspondents or TV like today  on the front.
The Army  I think was rather vicious in that regard  they said you don't work for us  you work for the Justice Department  so that $10 is for your board and room  give it to us  and they took it.
Jews dont get drafted into the army  which was not true.
So I went in the army and  and I was  went to the infantry basic training which Where It was north Camp Hood Texas which now is Fort Hood and it was rough and there was no running  there was no plumbing and there were lister bags for water.
He says to me  I am officer  a major in the army.
And there was an Army man in front and he told this Army man to let him in and want to talk to the commanding officer.
Partisans were basically people who did not want -- young people who didn't want to serve in the Army  did not want to go along with the regime.
So I spent three weeks with with the military intelligence refresher course.
In the meantim e  I was allowed  rather the army put together after work  schools.
I very quickly returned to college and went to Swarthmore and spent the next three and a half years there.
When the real war started  he was a young officer in the French military.
All the men have to join the French army because war was imminent.
Well  I dont know when it was  I think it was October  November  they had the -- there was an announcement that the age of entry into the army for enemy aliens  whi-which we were  had been lowered from 20 y ears to 18  I think.
And they help the Germans and now the full Romanian Army was fighting on the side of the Soviets.
He volunteered during Russia he volunteered to the army and we separated again in Russia.
Did you have any other encounters with other German soldiers and were they friendly or not?
Then we went to another street about three blocks farther and there was a Salvation Army Sund ay School That was much nicer because they played music there  the trumpet and the drums and we listened there an d then we got a cup of chocolate.
He said  \ What I do in the Army  to kill people that I didn't met  that didn't do anything bad to me?\
But these cars had to stop and let the other trains go.
And I'm conservative  because I had to make it  I di d. When I was in the army  I made 72 dollars and that's all I had and I bought a war bond of 18 dollars and 75 cents  every month for two years.
And since in the army its very important -- or even more important what you dont do  than what you do  instead of cleaning pots or -- or -- or being in the trenches  I was teaching in the signal school  reserve officers who were passing every three months   to take refresher courses in radio  telephony  and things like that.
And I'm not sure that the detailed justice in the so-called military commissions or courts or whatever we called them at the time  was any better in the long run than allowing a rampage  as the Russians did  and cutting it off.
Thats the burial of my husband in 1988 in He rmnahaute in jeru -- in Jerusalem  a military [indecipherable] Next Im in Israel [indecipherable] Thats the grave of Tuvya Bielsky in Hermnaha ute.
I had spent  oh  four years in the Army  and that made it even more important for me to know what was going on.
You know  its -- and the camps  the military 53 camps were very important in Switzerland  also th e object of penetration by the Nazi.
They have prepared documents calling Mr. Orovski   which is me under that new name to military service.
And my -- and a distant uncle of mine von Gasthof  he was a major 51 in the army  and was supposed to receive Hitler ra ther late for -- 40s  to visit a museum  that Zeughaus  the military museum in Berlin  and had stuffed himself with bombs  and he would -- was ready to embrace Hitler in a deadly embrace.
And he cannot say what he really -- that hes -- that he was a Polish Intelligence officer.
And then  after J une 42  when people could move freely  he assembled the men and the women together in the basement of the military headquarters near -- on the right of the church.
Do you remember at liberation  and you -- you suddenly saw -- realized that you were liberated -- Yeah  yeah. --
After military its -- besides theres a -- the life in the military  its more than in prison.
The plant was situated in an autobahn tunnel which was closed off at both ends and converted to a twolevel manufacturing facility producing wings for Messerschmitt military aircraft.
And I imagined that I would make a special review  I will stay on the -- on the -- on the reviewing stand with him  the army will go through  the music will play  I will salute  and I will introduce this is my cousin from America.
Of course  I also explained to my commanding officer that I couldnt leave Vienna until I get my mili -- mil -- military passport  because those are requirements to get the visa.
>> Bill Benson: In 1942  Irene  your father  along with thousands of other Jewish men  were forced by the Hungarians to do forced labor.
Nobody knew that he was in divis -- The 16th division was a Soviet army -- Soviet army  16th division -- -- partisan [indecipherable] Yes  but he wasnt there.
And you know those were these were Germans who were doing this?
And the way -- like we walk was not so easy  because you must know  between German and Lithuanian was something close  mean German talk to Li thuanian nationalist who work later  therefore German like not Gestapo  only military unit  and was against the Poland.
I can I was already a milliner at home for many years  and I went to Bratislava and Budapest 44 Rabbi Philip Sidney Bernstein  Jewish advisor to United States Army in Europe from 1945 to 1947  also served on Jewish Welfare Board.
And they thought maybe an army train  whatever it is  and the SS took off  the guards  and so did we.
Because Polish military uniforms were very elegant  you know  with the with the high boots Boots.
36:20 ( How did the Germans react when they saw you Star of David on you military uniform?) (
My wife  future wife  stayed with her mother and father because the mother was catholic  she could  she didn't have to go  and I left with that transpor t uh  uh Vienna  it was  I think it was October  ‚42  and uh  the  -------us with a um  with boxcars to Ther esienstadt  that was a  a  a former military camp for  for us and so it's just  and they made a ghetto out of this uh  of this city  just like they did in Poland  made these ghettos.
I ran into somebody in France just recently on the trip we took with Army and for some reason we were talking and this man had a number very close  as close as I've ever seen  he 3German: literally  \ Hats off  hats on.\
And then  after finishing ones first term  and when you reached your 18th birthday or past it  then that term would stop in school  you would be s be you would be come a part of the army itself  be sworn in  have y our basic training  then the program would come back to school afterwards.
I was inducted from Saint Joe  Missouri and went into the army in Leavenworth  Kansas.
Wha -- When you were there -- this was in Germany?
But not army  m-m military education thats safe -- soldier were taught  yes?
He left Poland at a very young age to evade the Russian slash Polish army  service in the army.
The first division is the number one division of the United States Army.
And in the morning when we made that bed  that had to be done in the military fashion.
And the stopped the whole army  the Russian army  and he screams in Russian...he's Jewish and he's liberated and he is kissing this cop  this Russian  and the whole army stopped.
Im speaking English  Im part of the American army  Im going oversea  Im going to fight the Nazis.
Cross the border  and go to another country; and  uh  maybe again join the army in France  which was being uh...uh  organized at that time.
So it means they were evacuated  we knew that the Soviet army is coming.
But you came in contact w ith  did you come in contac t with an opposing army?
And the second coincidence  Father Andre in Namir had  on his left  a cafe with horse betting and on his right a portion of the Commandant   which was not SS  but it was German army.
And this was very impor tant and Greece has to be very proud of that because the action of the Greek army delayed th e German attack against Russia by six crucial weeks.
They came from a side of Poland that was under the German occupation.
Way apparently yes ap yeah   the ge ge after he free from the Polish army after ze he got he he was yeah  definitely he pul he re the Soviet Union  or in the Polish army  I think yes  they did the [indecipherable] was not Russia  no?
They were walking  well  when they first came in  they came  the army came in  they were throwing candy to the children  and the parents said  \ Don't pick it up  it might be poisoned \  and they ob-obviously knew about it because they took a bite out of it to show it wasn't.
And 10 months after my entering the Army  all draftees were released from service.
Well  as I said he was in the Army when he -- before he came to Germany.
And he then  together with General Handy15 who was dealing with the military -- some of the leftovers of the Dachau Trials -- they issued a Clemency Report which I will gi ve to the Holocaust Museum  which I'm sure you'll find in the archives  in which they confir med three or four of the death sentences  commuted the rest  usually to life imprisonment  lowered the sentences on some defendants.
And my one claim to fame in the army was when they came to have a surrender  the 101 st Airbor ne surrender.
Its where sewing uniform for the army --- women mostly; and I started.
We were all togeth er a group of 1  000 women who were sent to the Polish country side which had been taken over by the Germans to dig tr enches for the German army.
And so many of us in those classes spent the one year which the Army required for you to go and be an intern  that is by medical metaphor.
Well  shortly after I arrived at Camp Ritchie it became clear the govern the army had decided that the program of dropping people didnt work  the Germans were too well organized.
Well  we think that we were escaping because the Germans are behind us  you know.
Lets talk about your military service  cause you -- you went in in June of 1942  and where did you go for basic training?
Hungary had an interesting way  it had a regular army and it also had an 01:50: army like an SS army.
He disappeared when at nesh when the Hungarian army was destroyed by the Russians.
The news there was like this: One guy went on the drum and announced this time everybody has to take the cows out  or things  because they're coming to take for the Army whatever they want.
I said  I must answer this letter  but I will not admit to adultery  because the army [indecipherable] they were very strong on that at that time  not -- not -- now it happens all the time  guys get with their fellow officers of lower ranking  and used to read in the papers  generals get kicked out  and so it was much more serious than now  now its -- okay  so anyway -- but I cannot say I didnt  because she swore in court that she did.
We came here because Moshe gave a concert in the army  and so people from Ottawa heard him  and they approached him.
End of Tape 1 Sam Spiegal 34 May 3  1995 Tape 2 A. We got those papers from her uncle  and it took us almost a year before we could come over here  even with the papers being in order and everything else  but we moved from to because we found out one of the brothers was alive and he was in the American Army.
R: I was even in the American Army  woul d you believe.
They were smuggling guns and other military equipment into the ghetto  with the sole purpose of whenever it comes to it  that we will not go to the slaughter voluntarily.
In addition  when Jewish chaplains obtained medi cal supplies and sanitation supplies and even ammunition for the Brichah  it was with the cooperation usually of their military superiors.
The Russian  how do you call  the Russian prisoners  you know  there were lot of prisoners of war from Germany that came home.
The  my father served  as I said with the German army during the F irst World War.
I was asked by the you army in Fort Lewis  Washington  to talk about the Holocaust.
This is the military intelligence five  but later I found out thats was -- be -- to transferred to MI six  but still to me it was the CIC.
Uh...I was very fortunate too  but...uh...then  of course  the...uh...the war began pretty much very quickly  and...uh...I was...uh...with the....I was with the Fish in the Haganah  and then I became...uh...Sergeant Major in the Israeli army  and I was pretty much stationed in the western Gaililee  in Nahariyya and in north.
So they made out phony papers  military orders  with my real name on them  and for Mike Swab.
Went to military intelligence school became core photographer  never went overseas but went through military intelligence training.
But we were there in this -- this river  near a village  and the Wehrmacht  the regular army came there  they heard that we have packages  Care packages  that we should give them cigarettes.
He was in the Polish army for two years and he was a very good soldier and he had right away a [indecipherable] of certain things that he did better 25 than others.
And in 1940 I got into the military service and stayed for ten years.
My father open a butcher store  and also he two other another part of business  he was doing wholesale supply to army and the governments insti institutions.
Interview with John Krawiec January 29  2015 190 well  so they took away arrest you  and so on and but couple weeks later  one day there was Polish major from the Polish army in Great Britain  I think he was in intelligence unit  he joined us.
When you got the war is over  you go back to Milan   theres no more military  theres no more I go to Padua .
People were talking about re-armament of Germany and so forth  but at the sa me time  we -- we -- as I say  y ou know  we were feeling that we had the Maginot line protecting us  that the Fren ch Army was so strong  that we had the best weapons  and so forth.
Of course that somebody of us had a private weapon  and -- and we -- it -- a decision by the authorities  yes  our Home Army was that we will not fight in Warsaw.
So when we got on the train and that was a military train  within hours a guy comes over and I could recognize by his hat  that this color hats and so on belong to the NKVD  we used to call it at that time  which later turned to be KGB in due time later.
Yes  and somebody  the military mail got screwed up  and they deliver it to me  while was in the hospital in Russia .
So  in Belgium  I really didn't have a job for work and there was that store where they sold blankets and suits from the military  the American  it wa s very heavy beds  hard job.
Because we knew that they -- the Russians were coming  you could hear the artillery and everything.
Especially  if they came  if they were things that came  not from the army or from the German economy but things that came in from some of the other support groups.
So we were sure that the German army is going to surround the around -- to take us around.
