Well  they found names of inmate s who had died in the camp and just put a marker on  which I suppose is all they could do.
And they came and told us we had to move out of our tents  but we werent going with them.
First  of all the problems of the camp  one of the things would  would be simplified if we only had one kind of person in the camp.
And I find out there's another camp  it's a better camp  you know  the DP camps.
Now what it was soon after we come to the concentration camp  but before we come to that  now then from Munich we go to a little town  the last 02:13: railroad station by the name Floss .
And our camp was Minziret in direction to Breslitoks  to the former Russian (?).
The one strange thing that happened in that camp was that we used to get uh people from Switzerland.
We got striped clothes and we became full fledged inmates of a concentration camp.
He would work in the quarry  taking rocks and he had to bring them back to the camp  enduring beatings all the time.
Went to a Zionist camp in the summer  and we went bicycle riding and met other groups to other little towns.
So you see that big fire out there  outside of the perimeter of the camp?
So you were in the camp for about a year and a half?
It was uh perhaps a mile away but you could see it  and we saw on the 5th or the 6th of uh August that there are railroad cars there which generally were not there and probably on the 6th  a great number of people were surrounded in the camp  because in the camp we were...and you believed you are...you were free in the camp.
They gave us so metimes not too much  but we had our meals and Terezin was a camp that they show ed off how well they treat Jews.
And it was yet I do believe before we had reached Dachau that I came across him  and he wore the concentration camp garb.
There was -- End of File One Beginning File Two 37 You were telling us about your experiences you have just come to Riga and you were working in this labor camp.
It was a small camp located almost in the middle of the small town.
Somehow received permission from Berlin to build his own concentration camp on the grounds of the fact ory.
And the camp  amount of people grow  I think that 400 to 600 people  one  uh  there were only 125 people in the camp all those months  4 or 5 months that  that before the camp was so big.
Somebody squealed when he was in camp in Auschwitz and he was executed together with other Polish patriots at the end of 1943.
So we had a mortgage on it  but it wasnt scary at all  the mortgage we paid out from the rent money  and later on even  we bought a nice little camp on the water  also paid off from the rent money.
And again they was rushing us out from the camp and they wanted to us to go clos er...um deeper in Germany.
Second one  we met her  you know  on on on that camp.
I did not relate this event to a previous event where the husband of Mrs. Gotismann was killed previously in the winter of 1942 when Karl Rheinger came into the camp in the middle of the night  and he told us to run around the building.
They didnt put us  they took us  and this was where I was taken to concentration camp on the train and I was sick  because I had open only wound right here  and continuously bleeding  but what worse wa s  when stop bleeding  was closing my eye.
And there was no water  not ready the camp for us.
Just was a Russian girl; but she was...was a Russian camp  too  there.
These -- They called them the Obersharfuhrer  that the camp  tha -- from the SS that administered the camp  and we had a few that were real vicious  too.
01:18:00 This was a camp surrounded and protected by the Gestapo.
But we couldnt and -- and Ive forgotten the phrase we use  but they mimicked it -- they even quoted us unfavorably  ﬁHeres what the Joint says ﬂ or -- and -- but we couldnt do any more than just be there as a physical presence in those very early days to -- it -- it had some morale value  when they hadnt seen anything except their concentration camp persecutors or Germans  or Poles  to see and American team of Jews -- or headed by somebody like myself.
We would go back to camp for lunch  back to the community kitchens  have lunch  back to sc hool for the afternoon session.
And and also it was a problem in the camp because they threw me out from the barrack because I was moaning from pain all night long and I couldnt th ey couldnt sleep and they f they felt that they are so tired that they just cannot take my  what you call misery and and sound  or pain  cause that would have ma de them more s what you call vulnerable to their to their work and because they were so tired.
My father was one of those who was arrested and he was put in the camp of Gurs  G-u-r-s  and for transportation to Drancy  and Interview with Al fred Lakritz April 3  2008 104from Drancy at fra -- Drancy on the night that he was being shipped out to go to his destiny  he didnt know where  but anyway went from Auschwitz to Majdanek   and he was allowed one goodbye  farewell postcard  that he mailed to my mother.
So then it was a heap of trunks of all this  and they brought with a list to the Kanada camp  where there was thirty barracks where all the belongings of these deportees were sorted.
I tell you a fact  what happened one time s. In this place  in concentr ation camp  come the Gestapo  and he wanted 150 women right away.
I had I have to pay for that  I have t I have to give his bicycle  which I loved  his bicycle one person came after two months to claim the bicycle  that probably he told  or somebody told that during the the [indecipherable] the pioneer camp  see he took that bicycle  now he wants his bicycle.
So when everybody was walking around in the camp looking for something to eat  so the SS came and said to us on the loudspeaker: We have some bread and canned goods for you on tucks waiting there.
Did you work  or -- In Stutthof concentration camp  we mo stly stood and in the beginning  we stood in appelle and then -- when we first arrived -- In a -- In appelle  just waiting to be taken  either to the gas chamber or to be killed or to crematorium or any -- that  and we worked.
But then one day I heard that about forty-two girls that came in '42 with the original transport that I escaped  you know  when I went to Hungary  are being taken out to a camp  which was called I think \ Auschwitz II\  but I heard later it was called the Statsgebaeude  which means \ a state building.\
And we were 118 transported to a camp in -- in a forest.
It was just a small -- sort of the size of a Starachowice labor camp type.
But my father didn't know about Auschwitz  and he didn't want his 15 year old child to go to a labor camp.
A. Well  they just said you have to come to a labor camp.
I did have some knowledge because in the displaced persons' camp in Italy  the Jewish people have organized themselves where those that knew a little bit more taught those that -- you know  the younger ones.
>> Bill Benson: So here's you and your brother now are with your aunt and uncle.
There were always dignitaries there of the camp dignitaries  or -- I was not a camp dignitary  or some SS people.
No  I didnt have to -- I didnt go to a camp.
Here is the eighth what you call commandment of the concentration camp.
In the DP camp in Munich  I eventually graduated from the Lyceum in 1947 an accelerated course with excellent marks  and the question was what's next.
I knew that my mother came from Budingen  and from parents who were not in the least religious  and in fact my grandfather  who moved in with us in 1936 when things started getting difficult for Jews in small areas in Germany  he always said I fought for the Kaiser and I'm German and I'm going toI've been born in Germany  I'm going to die in Germany  of course  he didn't he died in the concentration camp in Theresienstadt  but he move d in with us in '36 and so did my uncle.
There were othe r people  about 30 of them  young people  Jews  who were preparing like they are cou almost like a transport to or to the concentration camp.
A nd he came over to me one day and said \ Are you the Jewish girl that just returned from concentration camp.
We  at two two days later the commanding offi cer told us that were going to go were going to liquidate the camp  and Do you remember the name of the commander of that camp?
The camp had originally been established for Spanish prisoners and had been emptied after the Spanish Civil War.
So in quarantine you had to be like a certain time  and then you walked out to labor camp.
We were working  Monyek and I. And we saw a lot of people were working in this camp.
In a way it was good  because every other camp seemed like -- not paradise  but at least no t like hell.
Then they told my sister-in-law  he was married already then; that when somebody in th e family was hiding  that her father had to go to Poland right away or had to go to camp.
The camp was being evacuated en masse and people were be ing driven to a railroad station and people were just -- it was winter  it was snowy  snowy winter.
And he was not a -- really a strong person to push for improvement  so -- so he did what he was to ld  and then he was shot  and the new camp commander was an Austrian SS man  and he put in an Austrian man to be the head of the council  Murmelstein.
And Pepi  as usual  decided to  to help out others  so she had me do things to help out others and people who came let's say from Russia or from a camp  needed to stay over or go somewhere or get so me clothes  being sent being sent wherever they wanted to.
By now  everyone had  everyone had learned that when you arrive in a concentration camp they would ask you what your occupation was  what your trade was.
So this was sort of typical in the concentration camp system?
She applied for a job there because she felt if she was working for the Germans  she would have an ID showing that she was working for the Germans.
I'm with people that I  that I don't know  all alone  and I have a brother that came up from concentration camp.
It was a group that's Italian  you know  DP camp  kibbutz.
And my uncle 25 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD already lived with his wife.
He managed to fix some things and said  ﬁIf you can prove that they can live--survive--I can manage to get them out of the camp before it moves to Rivesalt es  but they'll have to live in a suburb where all the parolees and people who were on parole or former convicts who had no right to live in the city.ﬂ And we were given--we were allowed to rent--a little shack there in that city.
For a little while we were there  and all of a sudden me a nd Luta find out that they need people to clean potatoes for the -- for the camp.
That for these poor survivors to be living in this kind of a camp  while the Germans were living still  luxuriously in their own homes and their blonde children looked healthy and then were -- they were there  they had survived  they were alive.
I was sleeping on something called a camp bed  at the foot of the bed.
And the people who were outside were in a better situation than the people who were inside the camp because we  inside the camp they have to live through the whole experience what is going in the camp  a nd the killing was going over there.
If was in the camp under superv ision under the Nazis SA  the same thing.
So  they used to bring in the camp  and we used to share.
Some ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 people were in their 20s  maybe 30s  and they couldn't make it anymore.
And then there cam e...as we were talking about that  there came a order the whole camp will be liquidated ex cept the ones who attended the crematoriums.
So this was by people who had whom they had shipped to the camp  who in the meantime themselves had become Kapos.
While you were still in this first -- In this first camp  I -- my cousin Aaron  may God rest his soul  took me -- he and I went together  he was in the older unit  but he took good care of me.
I was one of the few people who had in the concentration camp  the knowledge of differential calculus.
But later come a law again that  that every Jewish -- youngsters from 18 'til 55 years old -- should go in a works camp.
And we were of course surrounded by SS guards and the camp was surrounded by electric wires and so on.
You went there and what w as  can you describe the camp to me?
And in due time I was shipped out to camp McCoy  76 th cavalry   reconnaissance troop mechanized.
The the way it was arranged the camp has two pieces  two areas.
They went to Auschw itz together  they ended up at some  I don't know what camp.
And in my book  in my estimati on  they were the heroes of survival  the heroes of camp  where there was no way of fi ghting death.
Well  you know  if if the if the camp was two miles away  I dont know how they would escape being discovered  but I dont think thats an issue.
We arrived from Buchenwald and the article  in the German language  describes basically how we came th ere  why we came there  and basically a little bit of background that we had all spent time in a concentration camp  and that we came to Switzerland for recuperation.
Were -- were your barracks part of any larger concentration camp  was it a sub-camp?
It seems I left it like this i n this camp till 1944.
So you could argue that if Hitler hadnt sent me to a concentration camp  I would probably have been -- I would probably have died during the allied air raid bombardment.
I was carrying this bicycle back to the camp -- we werent yet in this town what I told you -- the French --.
And I had a brother who was in Borr  Borr was a famous camp  you probably hear d about it  the copper mines  you know  USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0056 7and they took from Hungary  these kids to Borr in 44.
Was penetrated ri ght through the camp that we are going to cut the barbed wire.
Also  women were working on the premises in camp  you know  cleaning the barr acks  taking care of the laundry not personal laundry  but whatever  you know  the kitchen stuff and all that  and for example  later on  when I stopped going to the factory  to the brick factory  and I was helping Father quite often  he used to send me to work wherever there was a shortage of people.
Later Martin and his father were sent to Mauthausen concentration camp in Austri a. Here we see a document recently uncovered in the ITS archive.
I suppose the men must have been enrolled in the Army and maybe taken prisoners by the Germans.
The whole camp stunk and was dirty and was full of decay  and uh   typhus  and this is how Christian got sick and got the typhus and got delirious  and uh  one night she was so delirious she uh saw her parents in front of her eyes  and she jumped up from the ground because we were sleepi ng on the bare floors  and she saw her family and she started running to her family she thought   and she only was stepping on the sleeping people and made a whole big commotion  and I naturally tried to calm her down  and uh  while I was trying to calm her down  the uh  the woman in charge of the barrack came and with a stick started beating on me because I was making a commotion  we were not supposed to be speaking  it was supposed to be quiet at night  and she hit me so hard until the um stick was broken  and naturally I couldn't budge for 2 days.
And no of them were selected and all were put in a special camp  so -called a Czech \ family camp.\
>> Margit Meissner: So mother basically was permitted to leave the camp because when France capitulated  the director of the camp of Gurs said to some of these unwanted foreigners  \ You can leave.
They said that they are going to work on a -- work in a camp  a working camp.
The the women  somehow  were dispersed through the camp from the from that deportation  the from the whole Baden  from that area.
After the selection  290 men and 228 women are admitted to the camp as inmates and receive [indecipherable] SL: Everything is so -- so written  its unbelievable.
For example  when I was in one camp  working a vakhar  which is like a industrial place  and the railroad tracks on both ends of the -- whatever you call that.
And they did send us to a little camp  Prchin -Malkov  it was called.
>> Sylvia Rozines: Then we got out of the camp and we looked for an apartment.
When you came to this camp  he was with his wife there.
We never see -- we was sent to concentration camp  and these people I dont know because was better situation  was call like pe -- PW -- POW.
My husband right away played Ping Pong  you know  his life  cause that what they did also in the displaced camp with his cousin  played chess  played Ping Pong.
And the book  in fact  that he published about the camp the diary was dedicated to me  among other people  on the assumption that I hadn't survived the the camp.
The night before Gregory wanted -- treated me to a nice dinner and at the dinner he said  ﬁDad  what is it that we are going to look for?ﬂ And I took a napkin and I drew a map of the pla -- of the camp.
So your father was put into slave labor in Auschwitz and then transferred to a labor camp and then probably to Buchenwald until Purim.
And this was the night be fore the camp was burned down?
And then V.E. day came  and we celebrated V.E. day by going from our camp which was outside Verea into Verea to watch the celebration and to celebrate.
Interview with Henry Greenbaum December 20  1999 49 Well  Buna was a little bit cleaner than Auschwitz because Buna was already like a working camp.
Then  it looks like the Germans find out in the camp that he was an officer in their Army in World War I. They sent him to .
And and when you came back from la bor camp  you you didnt register Yeah  no  they didnt because the registration was in 1941.
We had no gloves  we had no working clothes  and we scratched our bodies from the scraping of the rocks and we carried them back and forth  and our backs and feet were aching us with no food  no water  and we did this all day long  and whoever fell and couldn't do it  they ju st whipped and the dogs were walking next to us  and one day a German officer came and told the block ----------  which is the woman in charge of the barracks  that he needed a group of people to work in a kitchen in another camp.
>> Sylvia Rozines: The leader who was Jewish from our camp  he opened the door.
We lived in DP camp  and we went in in the town of   so when I got that information to somebody and he invite us to go to the mayor of .
I don't think ther e was a bandage in that camp.
This next photo shows a fence around the barracks in the main camp at Auschwitz.
We survivors  who didnt have a ny papers  or the one who survived the concentration camp.
In every concen -- d-death camp  after they killed the people  there were special people  they knocked out the gol d teeth  and they got tons of gold  which they send it to Switzerland  and they exchange it for money.
And my much bigger surprise came  I went to Rome  because the capital always was the center where the Joint worked out of  and I spent a few weeks in a sort of reception camp called Genechita   City of the Movies.
There was too a -- a camp  this all is sil -- S ilesia  and we were there overnight.
5 And they were doing the bridges you know and the planning you know from the...and then in '40...1943  they made concentration camp. '
They were checking us to see if we were hiding gold in all the places they gave us uh  other prisoner clothes  and uh  and uh the whole life in ghetto to the concentration camp was like  again like day and night.
So I finished the first term  and then those of us that had reached age 18 then went home for a brief furlough  we reported to Camp Dodge in Iowa  then sworn into the army itself  huh  and then began our real army experience  because after the initia l beginning in the army you have just your uniform  your shots  your medical  the whole thing  [indecipherable] orientation  then you are sent to a basic training camp.
So  here I was 14:11:30 in a DP camp with Polish popul ation listening to a lot of anti-semitic comments  time and again  with most of them or all of them not knowing that I was also Jewish.
The next day  I mean when I came ba ck to the camp at night  the call me  he says  you're not go ing out any more  you are forbidden to leave the camp  you stay in the camp and I wear a badge with an the means I have to stay in the camp.
So when -- did you find out in Auschwitz what had happened to your brother and your mother and father  or was it after?
And I ask him  ﬁWhere are you from?ﬂ And he said  ﬁWell  I am from Krakow.ﬂ ﬁFrom Krakow?
And we were there at least a month when th ey came  the manager  or -- I dont know how you call him  and told us that were taken now for a different camp  and it will take a few days  and there -- there was a counting over there in that -- in Sharvar.
And Bella Ritter's husband had already been arrested and had been for years in a 108 concentration camp and she lived now with my cousin and they decided to go underground in Bavaria and he told me that befo re they left  that he considered Berlin too dangerous.
As a matter of fact  in my recollection of the concentration camp  this episode with the hanging was for a long time in the background.
Later on  when evacuation started  when the allies were approaching this concentration camp– all those camp were naturally liquidated  and I met up with this guy  with Heinz.
They were waiting for me at the airport and I was just– But first I had to spend  like most Hungarians  some time at Camp Kilmer in New Jersey which was a screening camp for people.
Uh I remember one prisoner and in fact I took his confession  in fact have uh have it still  uh where he said uh that he had been a guard at the Oranienburg concentration camp near Berlin and that he had frequently volunteered for execution uh uh squads and I asked him  well why did you volunteer.
There were some good ones.ﬂ But I -- my experience has been talking to people -- Americans  maybe Jewish people savay  that those who were not in the camps  hate the Germans more than the wa -- than the ones who were in the camp.
Under what circumstances and when were you taken from the ghetto into a work camp?
They didnt had -- excuse me -- they couldnt send somebody to the camp.
Demmerer told I'm going to a good prison camp  so we came in where I had knew... 13 We need to go back a little bit.
After a while we were taken over in the same camp to a different headquarters and one night  I would never forget that  we heard tremendous screaming.
So that day  when th e war broke out they beat everybody in the camp  all the Jews  they beat them because they were so angry that the wa r broke out.
Meaning mo stly small  petty people who took their power out on -- you know  they felt the power of being a director of a camp and these lousy refugees now are going to do what I tell them to do.
And at times  it was  they were going home  sort of  with victory  thinking that they killed partisans while they actually  the one that they killed was the ones in the family camp.
The b -- the -- th e part that was the womens camp in Birkenau.
And -- And what -- And the main thing  I opened up  but -- bout the -- bout the ca -- ‚bout the concentration camp.
We found out later that they took them away to a concentration camp that they tried out the crematoriums on them.
Could really some one have done what really happened to other human beings?ﬂ They tell the story that Himmler 14 once came to the camp  long before I got there  and when he saw what went on  he went from somewhere and he vomited.
He was already since 1935 in the camp  and they killed what you will hardly believe your  now with cleanness in the  with tidyness  with cleanness they killed the people.
And in that vei n  he wants to tell us that it is up to us to prevent any big loss of population  the Germans gave him a number of children between the ages -- I dont remember  young children  but not too young  you know  the -- they -- the Germans will bring those children to a sp ecial care -- camp  that they will get a very good care  better than 77 in the ghetto  that he can assure us will happen  and that will allow the ghetto to survive til war is ended.
The idea was  uh  uh  came from the  uh  comman...the camp manager.
Now  if you say  did you have anything to do 80 with the concentration camp -- which incidentally was not a question we -- I dont remember -- I dont think I ever asked it of anybody  cause I really didnt know.
>> Betsy Anthony: So the conditions in a Spanish concentration camp  do you know from your brother if they were similar to what we might imagine in a German -- >> Michel Margosis: Well  he said the food was lousy  conditions were not great.
Going back to the time we left England that we came home on the Queen Marry  commuted to New York  and went to Camp Kilmer  Ne w Jersey  and that's where we were given our leave.
He said that he has a brother -in-law who came home from the camp with her sister's husband and he knew our family  my parents who were very respected people in the town  and he knew that we were not poor people so he was very poor.
Rumors had it that the camp is mined and after we leave  it will be exploded.
Were there more refugees there working to help the camp stay aflo at in Oswego  compared to Merrano?
Well  you -- you hear this from the camp office  you know.
After the war  I remember now I kept in touch with a woman who worked together with my mother in the last camp  and she told me what happened to my mother.
He had the bike  he ro he took her since she was a young girl we told them we were brother and sister  cause we were afraid  we are from camp.
But at the end there was a breakout and he was among those who broke out of the camp and was caught and shot.
And...uh...the other thing was...oh...the camp...there was barbed wire all around the camp.
Eh–t hats another camp  which is about seven miles down the road.
Mostly we know -- nobody knew that there's existing an Auschwitz.
And of course  the word spread after that that there was this camp.
Maria died in Soviet Gulag  Professor Metz in a concentration camp  and Lev Aronson I found quite by accident in Dallas where he was the principal cellist of the Dallas Symphony and a teacher at the Southwestern University.
PT: Uh they  the  yes I remember the rumors that is going to change into a concentration camp.
Very blue-eyed  and had the air of uh  mmm  of uh such goodness emanating from him I remember later on when we were in the camp which he establishe d in Sudeten at the very end of the war  you know  we were always freezing when we saw a German because it meant that either there would be shooting or there would be beating or there would be some other kind of  of  of uh torture  uh  uh moral or physical.
So we went up that road  and we got within about three miles of the camp.
It was January  bitter cold  and they marched us out of the camp.
And my brother was in Poroshkov  in the camp  labor ca mp.
We had to carry them to another camp to be buried there or burned  I don't know.
the crematorium  when you saw the smoke and the smell  you knew what was going on  so you were almost prepared for it  because it was -- you know  you -- there were people even in camp that yo -- the underground worked.
And it was very bad  and my mother  she start thinking  if we not starve really  to death  you know  in that camp  in that Uzbekistan   then she send two my youngest sister to Russian orphanage  because in orphanage they have more food than all this.
Theres only one kapo there in this camp [indecipherable] camp  yeah.
Im not a hundred percent sure about when we went to Texas  but since the camp was not winterized  I would thi nk we must have gone in August.
But in the in these camps  we which we just passed through  only spent the day going through them  I remember in jeros in Prum   p-r-u-m   Germany   a labor camp  we were given six  one inch in diameter crackers  sort of dry cracker  and that was it for the day.
The second week  after the role call  they lined us up and some of us we nt  still inside the camp  to dig ditches.
Yes  we were punished in Stutthof for  I still had my mother and sister then  and then we were punished for 3 women escaped the camp.
All the time I see the whole camp from a distance.
And the black cloud and the terror of the con- centration camp?
He told me that he was servi ng as an orderly in the transit camp and had a message from my mother  and he added that it was strictly forbidden for orderlies to make any communication between people in the transit camp and people outside  but since I had been his student for quite a number of years and he knew me already as a smaller boy  he did it out of a gesture of frie ndship.
But then  in 1933  they took over a very large  what we called a hashavah camp  a cultural training camp for Jews who were changing professionally to agriculture. [
We obtained it from the pharmacy  the camp pharmacy  which again  was run by prisoners  and the prisoners who did run it was named Marion Dolinski [ph] and he was a very nice fellow and he gave us cyanide in the form of powder  which we put  wrapped in pieces of paper and each one of us had it with him.
My mother was on the womans side  and there was a fence between the womans camp  but I could see my mother almost anytime in the morning before work or when she would come back because you could see the womens camp.
We went into a woods  you know  and...uh...we went into a woods  and all of a sudden  the trucks stopped and we seen the barbed wires around  and we knew that this must be a camp.
Again Hans Bauer comes somewhere  and he check up...he was al ready...he was already big wheel in a concentration camp  so-called you know...big wheel .
I: You and Esther decided S: Thats right  and a few other friends who were with us in the camp.
The cruelty  I mean  you know  and that something like that could happen  I mean  you know  so -- so many people to put together and there were  you know  so many people in a concentration camp who didnt do any crime  it was no crime  it was just their -- their life there  for what -- what they came from  you know  like -- like the -- the -- the -- all kind  like the Gypsies  there were Gypsies there  and wer -- there were the Jehovah Witness there  and there were so many young girls there.
Vernet was a camp erected in the 1st World War for Austrian prisoners of war  for Austrian prisoners of war  for their Austrian soldiers at the German front uh front uh in 1914  1918  and when they were captured  they were imprisoned there and in 1939 the camp was used to imprison dangerous foreigners  and these were primarily Germans  Nazis  Nazis who had been caught in France and who hadn't returned...returned in time and then also foreign communists because they were also considered dangerous in view of the fact that uh communists were against the war at the very beginning.
Well  they put us back into the trucks  back into the camp.
In the D.P. camp  Jacob had the job of being in charge of the social hall which meant he was the electrician  the plumber; he set up the chairs   he took them down  he was the stage manager and he was the emcee of all the various goings on.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 4 Here we see David with a friend at the Foehrenwald Displaced Persons Camp   D.P .
I gave them description and all that  and  uh  the Rabbi that was at camp  he got in touch with my sister in Israel.
The only way that he would get out was if he could show that they would leave Germany.
Well go together.ﬂ We stood there probably for a couple of hours in the heat.
And instead of allowing the remainder of the prisoners in Auschwitz to be liberated  the Germans had another diabolical idea to empty the camp and force the prisoners on a Death March deeper away from the front and into German y. I had no idea what was rationale was there except that it had one result  it diminished our number by a huge -- in a very big way because it was wintertime and we were marched out on the highway  in the snow  and the outdoors.
And there 44 was a group of Hungarians and they were guarding the camp with the guns.
On that day there were no more transports out  there were no more SS inside the camp  and the resistance organi zation controlled the camp.
She had some friends  close friends from Hashomer Hatzair in the labor camp in Plaszow.
What I do remember  both onboard ship  and also in the summer camp  there was a real difference  there were the kids who were going to relatives  and the kids who had no one  and who were going to foster care.
And I had thought that at Buchenwald before going to the next camp of Leigenstein-Zwieberge   that I had maybe been sterilized.
I was aware that my father was in labor camp  but I thought that was just being a soldier and he always came back.
You just got beaten up or they took you...took you out from the camp and took you to the gas.
As a matter of fact  my sister in France was able to send me her address of this particular camp that she was sent to  but that was the last I heard of her.
Then   when they discovered another thing  not   was they discovered then   that the Jewish numbers  the tattooed numbers  [speaks foreign la nguage here]  they did not  they couldn't distinguish all of a sudden who is Jewish and who is not Jewish among the women  by selecting and when the  when the switch or the change of polic y occurred  the Jews  non-Jews should not be gassed any more  during an in-house selection  because there were no transports coming from outside  where nonJews were selected like the Jews  but I'm talking about in camp selection  there was  they stopped when the big influx of Je wish people were coming.
He came to the States late in 48  and in 49 with th -- with that outbroke -- break in Korea  he was drafted in the American army  and he  believe it or not  was sent back to Germany  in the same places where he wore a -- a -- as a camp inmate -- Im meaning as a DP camp inmate  there he was serving with the amer -- with the US uniform  as a soldier.
He was shaved and evidently his group was re ady to be led to the camp where they were going to lead them - whether it was A or B or wherever they led the men.
And a German fellow  who had that green triangle  green triangle it means he was a killer who was sent from a jail to the concentration camp  thats what he Interview with Joseph Koplewicz October 7  1993 49had  the green one.
And I think we were only in Dachau for maybe a day or two or less and we went to Allach  which is a side camp to Dachau.
I said  ﬁI'm going to camp for food.ﬂ I told the German I am going to the camp.
There is an expression in Yiddish which translates ﬁTurn the visor around ﬂ which to me meant  ﬁIf you can come back  come back.ﬂ And when they had taken me to the border and I crossed  they indicated to me that the other end of the border  just a few hundred yards inside France  there is a Jewish camp  they said.
But at the time when they liberated Auschwitz and all that  thats when we first started hearing about it.
In 1942 the Slovak government started to deport Jews -- not to Germany  to Auschwitz  the extermination camp.
The ones who was killed  I dont know if they buried them or left them on the side or took them back to camp.
01:46:57 So  in other words  if you had an exemption that could explode from one hour to the next  and our so called Stempel  stamp had expired and we were shipped to a so called preference camp which was Bergen -Belsen.
And she went back to Paris  I I believe and got caught and then sent to a camp.
That he is in that camp in that...in that city  and he is sick but he's take n care of.
After the war we found out that this transport was taken to Auschwitz concentration camp.
And the prisoner told me -- and he held it up for me to take a picture of -- he told me when the prisoners would first come into the camp  they would be lined up.
And they took us to Annaberg.2 That's this first camp there.
So we were in camp number two  and we stayed there for about two years.
And this is how the camp was liberated from that um  at  at that time  and um  they um picked me up and wrapped me up in a blanket  and they took me into the uh showers  and the inmates  the Germans that they caught  they ma de them uh put white uniforms on and  and they took care of the inmates who were very  very sic k  who needed care right away  and they had built a hospital outside of uh  uh Bergen-Belsen to uh put those terrible sick people and to help them to uh bring them back to health  and this is how th ey wrapped me up in a blanket and showered me and cleaned me  the German SS did that  and th en brought me into that uh hospital  and uh  I understand  um  Canadian doctor who looked at my leg  and I could see in his face that my leg was terrible  and he said  uh  he had a translator  and in French  they told me they were going to try and save my leg  and um  afterwards I found out th at I had gangrene in my leg  and he almost amputated that leg  and I was still fighting for 2 months in that hospital because I still had the typhus  and this is in the conditions that they found me.
She begged them to Anita Frank 46 [Date not labeled] Page 46 please... [End of side 1 of tape 2]... begged her  she  she was  she was  she was at Westerbork  the Dutch concentration camp  she was there when her parents then came.
And thats how we wound up in the displaced person camp.
>> Michel Margosis: She made decisions  my sister migh t have -- my sister is four years older  but my mother made a decision  the decisions  and she felt like she felt in that reception camp that she didn't feel right  and she was right.
In fact  one of my cousin  who was pretty husky  came back one time from a working camp.
She was shipped out to Sweden with the child  all the ca that camp was liquidated.
And then we had -- it was somebody what the -- all the Jews went back to Sobibor because the -- gesundheit -- and all the Jews went back to Sobibor  a lot of people went back to Sobibor  because the only sabotage which you could do in camp was ha -- taking the money what came in  fr-from the people that went into the gas chamber and they hide it in the ground.
And that was with me and with all those others in the camp  too.
And it came  and Did did this camp that you were in have a specific name?
It didnt happen in Germany  but they hated  like Mike  and -- I -- I cant even say he had hated  he [indecipherable] make it even with some people  this guy was an SS officer  whom some Na zis -- some -- no  not USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 38 nat -- some of the people in -- in whose house we lived thewa  had said  ﬁWell  these guys were in a concentration camp  he -- he got to be known around town that two of the guys with the Americans were in concentration.
I describe it in detail in my book and we were sent to Budzyn where there was an aircraft Heinkil Aircraft plant  pr obably the worst camp in the penal system as far as treatment went by one named Fikes.
They opened the inner gate  or the gate to the inner camp and made all of us move  walk into the camp.
And I understand now that she was the one who put the emphasis in the spiritual aspect of that survival in c oncentration camp  and from what I heard about her was that she was finding little pieces of candles that were you know  in the beginning  there was no electricity in camp  so th ey used candles  or whenever they were not allowed to use electricity and they still needed in the barracks a light  you know  for the work  for the administrative work  they had the candles.
And the people of the camp had developed their schools  their institutions  a cultural and social program  whether that  whether I was the c-  contributing to it or not  I don't know.
As a digression  one of the times that my father was home from his duties in in camp.
And as a result  my parents were allowed out of the camp.
We re you in Birkenau?(c.322) Do you work in haus commando camp?
We saw a huge trek of people with every kind of moveable furniture  wagons  baby carriage  anything  and these people were going outside the concentration camp.
>> Bill Benson: Can you tell us a little about what that was like when you got there?
And each person were living in a camp had to donate half a day work to the camp  like chopping trees for the fuel  sweeping streets or doing something.
Now and there was in this group -- one day  they and were in this  in this Ukraines  the guards -- and they killed one and  and they start to run away  so a few got away and the rest were caught and brought back to the camp.
And a USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0018 88 social worker took me out of the camp  although I was over 16  she faked my papers.
They were all doing one thing  either guarding the people who were guarding the perimeter of the camp while the people were being taken out to the woods in groups to be shot  guarding those who were left in the camp while the rest were being taken out to be shot  escorting groups to the camp  or actually shooting them.
15 ﬁModel Camp.ﬂ Camp after wh ich other camps were modeled.
Did you have any idea then  how the war was going?
And I came to Blatterspiel; and I asked him  \ Blatter... Uh   Herr Kommandant  will you permit the...\  Because he was the Kommandant of the other camp [ NB: HKP]  too. \ ...
And he declared that we were airmen and did not belong in the concentration camp  we belonged in the POW camp and shortly after that we got moved out.
That was a camp set for every field was a different field.
The only ones that they allowed was brothers  sisters  relatives that were there and if they found them they allowed them to take into the same room they had in the camp.
I was in Warsaw after the concentration camp when I run away from the army.
We moved out of the camp im mediately and moved into one of the SS barracks.
Riley  who was the other concentration camp guard  both each at different sub-camps  I believe - no  they both shot at Mauthausen  but they each went to different sub-camps later.
RG-50.030*0584 32 And I was in the Plaszow labor camp  which was in walking distance.
And Company G was near Saint Genevieve  France  and we were to take ov a Polish labor camp that was supposed to be in some woods  that were just beyond where we were.
Many people had great many friends  which wasnt depended  of course  on the individuals  but they were also the enemies of the societies  some lawyers  some doctors were taken into the camp.
Not long  two  three days  it was closed  evacuated this camp.
But  soon after that  when the war we were liberated by the Russians.
There was a concentration camp where the prisoners were forced to assemble V -2 rockets under horrendous conditions in abandoned salt mines.
And we went in the West Berlin   and we went to the HIAS   and we rented a room  and my my father and my mother and all the little kids  that couldnt get [indecipherable]   they went in a camp in Berlin .
There was a group of five Jewish families from Larisa  who established a camp on the slopes of Mount Olympus.
At the end of that 14 months  I got transferred then into the 30th Infantry Division which was at Camp Forrest  Tennessee finishing up their summer maneuvers there  and they went to Camp Atterbury in Indiana.
But that...that's how I ate..ate at one time chicken in the camp .
He had just come from the camp  he wanted me to see him like that.
And my father was sent to another camp  a nd I dont remember exactly the name.
I was [indecipherable] to a barrack with people from my town  but before coming to the barrack they brought us to a place where we were tattooed  taking away everything and giving us those concentration camp uniforms.
She knew  as far as she could recall there was no contact with anyone in the concentration camp.
Interview with Matilda ﬁJuneﬂ Bakker 38 UNIDENTIFIED MALE SPEAKER: It was a camp for people that escaped from Germany.
And they had heard through rumors that traveled  you know  through the concentration camps somehow maybe somebody was assigned to a...a job outside of the camp and traveled there with the SS  and they heard a little piece of rumor here about families and what happened to the other people and or somebody else and they got...they paid off...whatever.
21 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD What we got was a bed.
Got to Sachsenhausen and stayed there overnight  so I never went to the Sachsenhausen camp  I went to a barrack  and somebody told me that I was going to  up in a youth   and whether there was confusion  whether there was misunderstanding  I do not know  but in 1941  Ravensbruck became the most notorious women's camp  where they committed all these atrocities  these medical experiments and so on and when people hear that I was in Ravensbruck they say but you're not a woman  well in 1941  a satellite man's camp  Sachsenhausen  a satellite man's camp  Ravensbruck for men was installed  installed in 41.
>> You were talking about your father during the one period of time when he was gone  assumedly to a concentration camp or they sent him off somewhere.
They went to they stopped them in in Nimes   which is a city on the way  and they unloaded them  and they established a camp called Saint Nicolas   Saint Nicolas  and they put them in there.
Until that date  whatever I did is where they sent me  even to go into   to the kosher   the DP camp.
So our guards  SS men  they drove us to the camp as fast as possible.
Then got a letter towards the end  from my brother  who w-was in Austria   who said hes waiting to see who else is coming because there was a big DP camp right there  and they had a list of most of the people who got liberated.
And then we went to -- in Lublin  to a Jewish fellow what ran away from camp.
33 commando (German) 32 able to send to save the woman  and she go to labor camp and she could survive.
They made -- the they built the ba rracks  and they made a concentration camp.
And this time we are alre ady in concentration camp  Mielitz changed to concentration camp  and of course And how did the conditions change when it became Interview with Joseph Koplewicz October 7  1993 37 How we felt the condition changed?
These are staying and watching the camp.ﬂ The camp was always watched by the people.
No  thats right  yes  yes [indecipherable] Other people have mentioned a camp called -- its named after a cigarette -- in France.
McCloy was condemned as having done this as an act of political expediency in order to woo the Germans back into the Allied camp so they could be rearmed and help fight against the Russians  the Soviets.
Totally -- Im -- Im telling you  truth is stranger than fiction  theres my mother and my aunt in the same station  the da y I got released from the camp.
Where is God ﬂ when I found out what is going on in camp  that they killed all the little kids.
And when we were  in the summer in our camp we put on a large Indian pageant every Thursday night.
I believe that Coward  Charlie Coward  CMS Coward  used to have it inside a Red Cross parcel in the Red Cross stores and he used to go in there 18every night and get the latest news and then come round the camp and tell us what was going on so we knew exactly what was going on– [DL] And are– [RJ] We knew about the second front  we knew about the Russians coming in. [
We were talk -- we were starting to talk about the time of liberation at Auschwitz.
And one of the reporters from the New York Post interviewed me and said  I understand that you have a number  a concentration camp numbe r -- because this party was -- was my 18th birthday and was supposed to be maki ng up for what is called sweet 16 in America  which I didnt have because I was in camp.
So this camp was -- do you remember the name of it?
And they were the ones that had sort of organized this sort of mutiny to turn the camp over to us.
Whether it was kosher  I dont know  but we did have a kitchen and we had lots of -- we had plenty of food to eat in that -- in that displaced person camp.
What I want to point out to you is that in camp  in Viniki  which was a slave labor camp  the difference between the poor in the villages  and the kids of -- th-the kids or parents of wealthy families  was that the wealthy and the city people died first.
And they were bombarding the -- the camp  or were they -- No  not the camp -- -- [indecipherable] the train? --
They -- they -- you know  we were from one camp to the other  we were sended.
And he went there's a concentration camp right near Hamburgh which is called Neuenga mme  and I understand that my that Dr. Sieveking traced back to where my father was  went to Neuengamme  and told him you can't have this man.
With my -- In -- in the ghetto  when you went into the ghetto.
I think somewhere --we were the first hospital across the Danube  so I think--or somewhere along the Danube  and we one day went to another concentrati on camp  a smaller one  and I don't know the name of this one or where it was  but I do re member it was a cold and rainy day  and we went to the --for some reason we went to the administration building.
If somebody succeeds to go in a camp or be among the free world or go out for labor  please tell what happened  please tell the world what was happening.
There were also some escapees from the prisoner of war 39 camp.
And they came overnight to park their bodies in our camp.
And my sister was with her [indecipherable] in the same camp with the -- barrack with the woman  and she says  you know  they need another s -- not stenographer  dactylo  a --a typist.
Do you need this -- my demand to them was at that time they must get the children out of this camp firsthand.
So you arrived in -- in -- did you s -- how did you know you were in Auschwitz?
And there was a again a a reli a resettlement camp for soldiers in Herford  and my sister and mother ended up in Coventry  and thats not too far away.
And as Colonel Sparks' narrative in th e one book that I was reading down in the library  it was on our way to objective in Munich that the divisi on came across the Dachau Concentration Camp.
That's an old man that I saw had cut his wrists  and I shouted because there was blood spurting from his wrists  and we made a tourniquet  bandaged him up and he was taken back to camp and he was beated up savagely and he was killed that night for trying to deprive the German state of labor.
They took us out from there on a march because then we go in from there to Kaufering That was a camp  you know  Landsberg was the main camp  Kaufering was a side camp.
We were housed now in a concentration camp adjoining the enamel factory ra n and operated by Oskar Schindler.
I only knew that the camp must be like in the back  I have to go ba ck and undid it.
Q. From the concentration camp  but I want to ask you both about the escaping about taking your mother out  about taking Gaynos h out.
Now to come back to that...uh...the transpor tation...to the transport to that camp.
I was told they found a restaurant up in the attic of one of the barracks run by one of the men of the camp  they even hired some German waitresses.
When the camp was taken over the by the British  it was taken over in a truce between the Eighth Ar my  the British Eighth Army and the German Army  whichever it was  the idea bei ng to create a sanita tion zone and there would be no fighting in that zone.
How many of you were there  in your group that arrived at the camp?
I... That scarlet fever was still in Auschwitz because I brought it with me from the camp in uh Holland.
good  and very good  because if not if she could not do that  we couldnt be alive in concentration camp.
And we then were ordered out of the camp to help re-engage the German soldiers.
I put them on a wagon and I sent them back to the camp  and the captain had seven horses  because one I had kept for him.
>> David Bayer: Every morning when we go to work in our camp to the coal mine  sometimes we had to walk  sometimes they would take us on the train.
Whatever it took to carry these vats  and to bring to the camp and put in certain place; and people would line up  and this would be served by our people.
The Poles and the Czechs  the majority of the Poles and almost all the Czechs went back east home  and after a matter of 6 weeks or so  the people that were left in camp were Jews  a few hundred Jews  a few Poles who and Ukrainians for whatever personal reasons did not want to go back.
Well [indecipherable] So you did -- you talked about it some  and I wanted to know -- this is kind of a -- a question that -- that you might have somethi ng to say about and you might not  but Ive heard some talk about -- about there bei ng discrimination in Israel against camp survivors  and that there was some looking down on camp survivors in particular because of what they had been through.
Interview with Grant Shultheis October 8  2010 25 When you first entered the camp  what did you think you were seeing?
A friend of mine was very sick in this hospital  and somebody come  you know  the  between the hospital and the crematorium  in this camp  where they assort th e clothes  they had some uh covers  like this  covered on the uh  oh on the wires so nobody can see  look through.
And so so that was before my cousins  I think  were sent to labor camp.
The Germans had demanded that an American pe -- ma -- officer come over and look at an area where th eres a prisoner of war camp so they wouldnt shoot and kill our own prisoners.
I remember in the slave labor camp  av -- one of the girl was sitting with me who was my lager si ster  and she was a married woman  a young married woman  and she was telling me her life story cons tantly.
And then  you know  we saw large kegs  we asked the guy  ﬁWhat is this?ﬂ He says  ﬁSchnapps.ﬂ So we took a keg  and we rolled it on the sleigh  and we brought it back to camp.
However  about two three weeks later  we were told we have to empty this camp and we are to be taken to a new concentration camp.
I was Jewish  I was a woman  I wasnt old enough to go in into into the camp  I had to have different papers  my I mean  I I was already put into so many categories  I didn't like to be.
several hours later after I came into the camp  I was shown the smoke.
He -- After we left camp  he was totally -- not devastated  but destroyed.
In January 1945  as the Soviet Army approached  Manya and other prisoners were evacuated on a Death March  then transported to the Ravensbruck concentration camp.
A. That was a letdown  the camp  1500 people or something.
And since since my mother had property  and my husband wanted to go to Treblinka  he was in seven concentra tion camp  and he wanted to go there.
The problem was what to do with Esther over the summer  and Hyman Goldman was on the board of Camp Louise  which is a Jewish camp.
Yeah  that but I was confused because he was with them you say  in the labor camp A2: Mm-hm  for a very short and yet  he wasnt with them yeah  he wasnt with them Interview with Mira Zimmerman January 23  2015 23 A2: for a very short time  but he wasnt like in the same accommodation  it he he di he they they were separated.
They brought us this life message and then one day it stopped and then we we re certain that he is up in smoke or Mengele took him to another camp.
Early December  transferred to a concen concentration camp  early April  45.
Since this came so rapidly  they did not have time to dispose of us  because the plan was to somehow eradicated the camp with the inmates.
So  uh  you were not treated with respect  but then from one camp to the other  except the different methods in which to  which to eliminate you.
I mean  I went to one camp where th ey were in fact I -- I -- I fo -- I found  you know  one -- one little eight year old boy who had been there for two years.
I I know o I meet all the commanders  cause you had to call  and then when you first went to the camp  then you go in and ju st let them know youre here.
And one day there had been some fighting and the police brought these -- ha d to break it up and they brought these young men in to me as camp administrato r to be punished.
I told Estucia   hey  guess what  I have bread  whole brea d. I have to tell you  you know  something aside from the -- of the human beings  you know  women or men  women in 24 particular  we each one had in the camp what we used to call a boytl .
We didnt get any answer what we asked directly  what camp  what place.
Because the camp was full of lice and vermin of that sort.
He had -- oh  here  there's my uncle who went to -- oh  there's my father  my Uncle Bela   the one who went to Ecuador with us and their younger brother  the one who we nt to concentration camp.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0046 54 How old was she when you to ld her that she was Jewish?
You know  our camps  our camp - Majowka/ Strzelnica - Starachowice was located in central Poland within that industrial district  and there were others - there was Skarzysko-Kami enna  there was Radom  there were other camps that were now being all evacuated.
Because you kn ow DP camp we didnt know where we want to go.
I know I had made in one of the DP camps in the Wels camp an American blanket  pair of pants  and an Eisenhower jacket.
What acts of resistance did you see in the camp of any sort?
We heard confession just by walking with some person who asked us for this privilege or we were hidden in some corner of the concentration camp because to hear confessions...you see it was really for the Gestapo some cause of a torture  and we tried to help the people that really in such way that these are became the victims of torture.
And then after this year that I spent in– I made contact again  I wanted to get back with a youth organization and I found interestingly that the Communist Youth Organization  the Pion eer organization probably could use me because  I mean I went thro ugh the boy scouts  I went throug h the Zionists  I had some very definite ideas and I answered an ad and became a director of a su mmer camp.
We reached a camp called Wittenberg on River Elbe  which is in the eastern part of Germany.
They wake us up in the camp 5:00 in the morning.
My brother was already in the la at la in the labor camp at that time.
As someone who originally comes from Ne w Jersey  Id have to say I think youre better off that you went to Wisconsin  but -- nobody from New Jersey wants to -- I have a friend  my friend that was in camp with me  she lives in Englewood.
And the Russians came in a nd the head of the camp even held us a speech and said we should all leave the camp and go to the next town is the Czechs and theyll take us in.
So you went back to the camp yourself for the inspection.
And a Jewish man came to be the camp commander  and he was the son of a bitch  he removed my father from rations  from food.
We didnt speak English  but they cut the wires  and they told us we are free  because the German ran away from the camp  they locked up  and we didnt know the war was over  either  but we understood whats happened.
Erwin Baum 77 December 5  1995 Page 77 Tape 3  Side A He says  ﬁIf I could get hundred dollar bills  a lot and some jewelry or watches  I could pay off some people to bring our brother from his camp to our camp.ﬂ So I -- whatever I -- nobody saw  because we were ordered to put all the valuables in a big box  but I gave to the driver.
And those who had no partner were not even seeking for any partner  because they had their husbands at home  or in -- during the war  somewhere on the front  or they were old  and were never married  and had no -- di dnt know what it means to have a partner at all  yeah  spinsters  who were -- but they were decent people who were idealists  because that was the reason why they were put into the camp as Socialists or Communists.
And in Gross Rosen  they uh...we were waiting there and in process of being sent to another work camp.
I was taken on the ninth of September 1943 out of jail  and transported to a forced labor -- not forced labor camp.
When Hitler heard that  he put him into concentration camp as his personal prisoner.
Same camp where we where we was  but we clean up.
So anyway  we went from there  they arrested us and they brought us to the city jail  and there we were  I think  for almost a month.
of the concentration camp who were s till alive  would ask for food  and they would eat it so fast that they would die from Oh yeah  yeah but Yeah  did you did you have those types of things happen?
We came in there and this camp was in the m ountain  about 60  60 uh  I don't know how many bags were there  about 30 or 40 small bags  and they all worked in a  in a place they used to make uh  holes for the V-2 missile  the Germans built a V-2  the V-2 whatever you call them  V-2  V-2  ----- ----.
But my mess people  they were supervising so I wanted to make sure that what they were getting was good so I had a sample of every bit of food that was served in that camp.
She obviously wanted to get me out from whatever it was  so the lager came and naturally slapped me and she said don't you even know your own number  you idiot and so I...and since they called my real number and we didn't know what was happening or maybe Yelda...I'm I'm really not quite sure on that  but what happened was as we came to the camp  there was Director Keller from Waldenheim.
Where they which camp they went to  Buchenwald or Auschwitz  wherever they or in some cases they were if they were young enough  they go back to Germany and they put them under work camps.
I could see what started going on and I was very  very upset with all those things  and I figured that I couldn't stay over there too long  and I decided to get out and when I went to to the camp  this was before they took all the Jewish people out from our town.
And I do that after the war in Germany  for people who are escaping from Poland  who could not get admitted to the displaced person camp.
Unfortunately  it didnt happen that way  that the first two Russian soldiers coming into the camp  instead of hugging and kissing them  and feeling free  one said to the other the word  Evrai  which was like a bad way of saying a Jew.
He was from the army and big man  but was in concentration camp.
Actua lly  it wasn't so much a family camp because there were hardly we did not have any children in this group.
So we were taken there and the name of the camp was Reischof  and I need to look at my piece of paper here to tell you how it was spelled.
The guy that was in charge of the camp  Mr. Ickes  was there for killing his wife and her boyfriend.
Is there anything else about the camp that you think you should say before we go on to Switzerland?
We couldnt go to Isra we stayed back up we were in this displaced peoples camp  and there were people from Russia  people from ru each one was a group.
The uh  the Gestapo appeared in our--we were living uh  in  in our own apartments at this time.
AndIthinkwewere onthetrainbetween the 22ndofOctobertothe24th–or25thofOctoberwhen wearri–whenwefinallyended upinasmallstation called OloronSainteMarie whichwasabout 15orsokilometers from the camp.
And you know  after we were in DP camp  a lot of guys was playing tricks on the women  you know  we see a nice looking girl you come in and say  hi baby  oh I thought that was my sister you know [laughs] You know  making jokes like that.
But it wa s built outside the camp so youd have to run out naked to take the shower and come back.
Walking up to the camp  we saw blood on both sides just trickling down  both sides of the road going up to the mountain.
did you know what a concentration camp was  or what did it mean to you?
Well  the  I must uh very briefly say that uh  the Symphony of the Holocaust  the melodies came to me while in  in Con-Concentration Camp  and here is another thing that probably helped survive bes-beside God's will.
No one came back from the camps  I was the only one there who had come back from the camp s. And there were Jews in those towns in Holland  every town had Jews and  and they had wonderful lives th ere.
And they told us in the labor camp that they didn't need us any longer.
Scrobof had a uh  POW camp for Russian Soldiers  and one of our bullets from our rifl e hit one of the ----------- accidentally  and got killed there.
Was the camp part of was it isolated from other buildings?
Im interested because I lived this period; I know that right now from history was a criminal camp.
And uh  when we were transferred to the other camp  with Mike Swab  of course  we teamed up  uh  filling lorries   and they have a name for that  auch   which I don't know if there is a name in English  means in working  you fill your lorry and then if the others are finished  you can rest up.
And I had my helmet packed in a bag  in my barracks bag  and and on our way in I say to this fellow in the camp  he was from near Cincinnati Covington coving Covington  Kentucky.
And and then it used to get very windy in the camp  like from the sea  from the Mediterranean  used to get very windy.
Not only at night  a couple of hours a day and if you found a Jew on the street  you know  wanting to buy something you could be shot for that or you could be taken away to this concentration camp which even tually wound up in Auschwitz.
She was less than five feet tall  very Thomas Buergenthal 44 November 28  1995 Page 44 charming but very toug h. I mean  the fact that she could surviv e that camp.
We only wanted to believe the good things like...uh...for example there were some incidents  while in this camp still  that all of a sudden some Germans would come and say...uh ... \ Is there anyone who has relatives in Israel?
And that was quite clearly expressed in schutzhaft orders and in the discussion of what schutzhaft was and how schutzhaft was supposed to be applied in the documentati on of the Gestapo  of the Reich Ministry of the Interior  and of the concentration camp commandants themselv es.
You were put into a quarant ine camp for the first month?
And some caps also with the same stripes  and then we were led to one of the barracks we had seen there in that camp and a man who called himself the elder  the block elder  blockaltester  block elder received us.
And the trainload passed through Munich and comes up to Stuttgart and the train is on the track and their going to be put in this camp.
She was not an bitch  she was a normal human being  who was living later on in a displaced person camp  and believe me  she would have been such an horrible woman  she wouldnt have survived one day.
Then at night  I fell asleep on the camp and every morning they took us the bod ies and put it... There were two trains  two cattle trains especially for that purpose.
I got even with them -- them a little bit  and here I became a prisoner like anybody else  but I became a cook to the Nazi -- to a Nazi  then -- then -- then -- in a camp  and so I survived better  and I met -- did I tell you I met a -- a -- a husband of my aunt?
When we started to work in that camp  it was not ready  the camp  yet.
Later Agi  her mother and sister were interned at the Plaszow concentration camp.
Instead to put them to jail or instead they give them fine  they brought them over to this concentration camp  which was a very notorious concentration camp.
I don't know where I found a needle and I pulled most of my blanket out with thread and I cut off...at that little camp we were wearing red stars instead of yellow stars painted on our clothes  civilian clothes  and what I did is I took pieces out from one side and covered the star like a little pocket.
When those sons were the age that you were when you were in the labor camp and in the other camp  did it make you think of those times?
Did you know anybody else in the group that you were in at this transit camp?
So we   inwe  all the non-Jews disembarked   which was a substation to deportatio n to  to camp other than Ausc hwitz  to camps like Dachau  Buchenwald  Mauthausen  which I find out later on.
Well  we did get to to the concentration camp of Heidelberg  unknown to me at that time  but made known to me later that as we were on the Wilno grounds  the commanda nt of the concentration camp called 32 the commandant and said  \ Hey  I killed all my women in and now I have 200 hands to work.
So we  we had the information and we know that and we also knew that there was a plan to destroy the camp you know the evidence you know.
And later  after this  we all finally go to concentration camp  couple [indecipherable] we go  because the concentration camp was on the mountain  you know  and thats was years  ye ars ago a quarry  right?
They   Mutter  Mutter   and Mengele came to our camp.
that they were concentration camp prisoners and you knew about concentration camps because Because I had read about them.
No  but between Rozwadow and Ulanov was a lit tle village  a big village  Pisznica  and they make a camp over there from the Jews what they came from Austria.
Yes  also a DP camp  and I stayed there til  well A long time?
All right  so 1500 people get -- how many people were in this camp to begin with  do you have any idea?
Up to then  whenever you were sick or you told them that you were sick  you couldn't do anything  they took you right away and they said  \ You go into the Lazarett [ NB: the infirmary in Camp 3].\
And they saw  oh you came from the camp  from the camp where -- and I remember that some people were working in a bath house  a place where people came to wash themself.
And which camp was taken over  which camp was lost  and so forth.
It just so happen   in this camp also I had a cousin ; actually two cousins   two brothers.
For instance  this fellow   this civil engineer  his brother was also in the camp but of course  he was not released and he was a chemical engineer and they wouldn't let him.
So  I knew that I entered an concentration camp  in spite of the f act that we really went through the door which said [indecipherable] fry.
And then one or two  I don't know who steppe d out  and told her that we are not going to go the barracks until Rose is taken--she had been brought into the barrack from the factory  and was in that sick room  but we wanted her to be taken to a doctor.
But right behind the gate  there was the train  the railroad.
We went on summer vacations every year and I particularly was sent during the summer vacations  from maybe the age of 10 on or so  to a camp.
The episode of the initial strike took place some months earlier  but the mood in the camp is still lousy  it never did get repaired.
A nd this is what I found out when I came into  into the concentration camp  and how I worked there  and  and  and I knew all this was going on and  and one time  a transport of Hungarian peopl e came  and I understand  I was told that these people had no food for 2 days  and they put them in 2 barracks  and they had no food  and they were going to send them to the crematoria.
Members of my family  while we were there  in W DP camp  there was always lists right from the first moment on.
This camp was so bad  and you had 3 types of people there.
later on  but lets go back in our to the chronology of when youre leaving Bergen-Belsen The camp.
But it was one of the most vicious administrations that ran that camp.
Uh  one time we ------------  it is very important to  I was called  I told you started by the uh uh man who was in charge of the Ge stapo of our camp  and told me the next day uh there's a transport coming  and one man killed a prisoner.
Then we were taken into barracks  into what was then Auschwitz -Birkenau.
Because the Czech girls  who were the first that came to camp  were in the position of administ ration and power.
Are you referring to deportation to Germany or deportations to camp -- to -- to death camps?
Interview with William Hunley February 21  2014 31 About well  actually in the camp  only about one day  I was right next to the camp for another day.
>> Esther Starobin: Well   I know they were in the camp.
He was in -- around Ordruff and the soldiers who were there within two days of the opening of the camp  I think  are considered liberators.
Were the Germans in the ghetto  or were only the people -- the Jewish police in the ghetto?
We came to the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 18 ghetto.
But we had no fifth row in the camp flag like produced in all of those drawings.
And all the commanders of the camp fr om all over were sitting there.
You want go to Reinsburgstrasse  ...ﬂ The Reinsburg Street is where was the other DP  the main DP camp.
And I only learned Yiddish in DP camp after the war.
Everything  they c ouldnt  the Wehrmacht  thats the   and the Wehrmacht ran the camp  ran the factory.
>> Bill Benson: That night I believe some 30 000 Jewish men were arrested.
We got off and that was the first Schlactensee camp that we k -- arrived at.
And we -- we had s -- we lost stuff -- we lost the camp.
We were hemmed in and we just never -- and why we were given a pass to get out of there  I don't think that anybody ever left the camp other than the Danube River there a little bit.
That was -- this was 1940  so that camp had been established somewhere between '36 and '38  mainly holding Spanish refugees that had come into France due to the Civil War in Spain.
01:40:46 You must remember  there were thousands and thousands of people in each camp.
NESSE GODIN Page 16 people had already little jobs in the little town  some people worked within the camp  some people uh went to school  so things changed  but at the beginning it was very organized living.
We shuffled out of the camp when we realized  the whole night -- how the liberation occurred is ju st too much for me to describe.
You know Lithuanian  there were Lithuanian tortured my Germans  too  oh  concentration camp and everything.
One person  one woman  was able to escape because the others were caught and they were hanged in front of everybody in camp.
break] I: You were talking about how important religion was for helping you survive S: well all the time that we had been in the camp  religion gave us a lot of strength.
Well  they they wanted to shoot every German that came in the place because they had been  uh  put in  incarcerated in this camp and they were skin and bones and they  they were ready to tear them apart with their bare hands  so we had to have our men walking around with guns to keep everything  keep the keep these people from uh killing each other or killing their former  uh  masters so called.
First he was in a labor camp in Estoni a. Then from there he was in Studhoff .}
No  we know we are here tomor -- and on the followi ng day  Saturday  came an SS man with a truck  and loaded us on the truck  we were 19 people from this camp.
Made a long story short  it was the girl  Judith Kerienyi  whom I met five years earlier in a camp.
I helped with the evacuation of the Hungarians at Camp Kilmer.
You sang a song for me one time that you learned in the camp.
They were lovely  lovely people  and they were so to speak belonged to the German Jewish group in the camp  but were very good towa rds us.
And the machine gun on the gate of theŠoverlooking the  the sort of plaza in the camp was empty  for the first time.
They were one of the first to be deported to Auschwitz.
And I understand he was one of the oldest survivors of the camp  and he stayed in Czechoslovakia  Romania  every time theres a war  and every time they divide the country  it becomes another country.
That was set up as a displaced persons camp because a lot of people were released who didnt belong in Italy.
My God  there was almost a riot in the camp by Polish people.
Wentworth Films LIBERATION/DP 2/8/95 RABBI JUDAH NADICH Page 11 SWB: Long pause JUDAH NADICH: Each umb DP Camp had a military officer in charge together with an and one or more people sent by the JDC (The Joint Distribution Committee).
As far as I knew  I will not be able to make it because the Germans will send me right off into the concentration camp.
When the people come to the came to the camp  to Marchstad  they didnt change the clothes  they left them in the clothes.
So  now  they didnt want any more Polish women Christians; they wanted the safer type  which is from the Jewish camp.
Relig ion was not -- you will f -- you know  many people became very religious once they were in the camp.
There was no straight bus from the camp situated next to Haifa to go to Jerusalem.
We went to another camp and uh  when we worked on construction of bunkers and buildings for the Batta Shoe Factory which I assume was producing shoes for the German army because I don't think we were used for any non-military projects.
When I came to this country  I was still running  and when I  when I was in a regular bed -- I didn't feel this much after liberation  I don't know why  in  in  in displaced camp.
So it was the excitement of the whole -- of the whole camp.
When I came back from the concentration camp  the first thing I went to was [indecipherable] to the Ponary  and I find out a ll the places where was the this  the -- the man who were  the beginning of the war taken from th e city  and this people  and the other people  and from [indecipherable] night where we were inside.
But in 1941 or so my father was taken to a transit camp  Pithiviers.
But I still didnt believe that they had gas chambers there  I mean  I -- I thought it was a labor camp  you know?
Uh  the camp was  like I said  a work camp and not a camp with gas chambers.
When we would have what the called the Zel appell  that means that in the morning the roll call would take place  and because I was   that means that I would be there to deliver messages to the central off...to the central block  to the commandment  or to anybody and bring it back to the people in the camp.
Were they ever taken over there to see that  or was the camp ever cleaned up?
They were helping people and the sisters were killed in a concentration camp and she got -- many people ask me do you know her  because it goes around here and talks all the time.
One day being in camp  he  this little child 10 years old  he asked me  \ Smulo \  he calls  called me Smulo.
And the Breecha would bring survivors -- now the area around Berlin was four powered  so they would -- they would come in at night  so they wouldnt be stopped and the British couldnt intercept them with these survivors that they had and they would leave the survivors at this small place that -- this secondary camp that we had in Berlin and then the next day  in daylight  those people could be moved in to the -- the big DP camp.
Flossenburg was a well-known penal camp where most of the work was in the stone quarry.
And we were marched out of camp  and I remember that we were marched out by fours  which means they were marching in groups of four s. And somebody in front  maybe there was a row that there were li ke three people.
So Gestapo keep him there and give him good  you know  and this and now we're going to se nd you to the concentration camp.
That's where I got to know my wife over there in 1942 because women and men were in the same camp.
The pilots of this bombing raid 40 years earlier now they found out from this Stern magazine article that they bombed concentration camp prisoners and they caused 8 000 of them to be killed at the last 8 Hitler Youth (German) 9 school (German) 10 Swastika (German) 7 minute of the war.
And then if at the last minute theres a change in people  like if somebody intervened  or if somebody else had called Vichy with a name of a person they wanted to take off  or and Vichy would respond to the camp  theyd have to take them off the truck.
But no  and -- and then of course  what was happening that the Russians are getting nearer again  so they took us to another camp.
And I was in Camp Sibert in Alabama in chemical warfare which meant you did everything in basic training with the  as the infantry does except with gas masks on.
So in Dachau we just took all our clothes off  we ha d to get the clothes which they use in the concentration camp  the striped clothes.
Well  I was  uh  an engineer and and as I said our  my project was to  uh  help bury the dead because my buddy  Al Salzman  was on a bulldozer and I helped him grease it and maintain it and  uh  had opportunity to see quite a lot of the camp.
As I said  my mother said we all pray to the same God.
44 Camp elder (German); prisoner functionary appointed by SS to serve as camp representative  but answering to the SS.
So he was -- and ironically that was done -- I think it was the Jewish police that -- cause they didnt know  they were just told to s -- you know  we need some workers  you know  for a few hours and so he ended up in the camp.
Our particular quadrant in the camp  our section  in the back there were woods  if you faced the entrance.
But when the war got bad  they were drafted and put in charge of a hard labor camp. \
So when we came to this camp over there  were some people from Yugoslavia  Jewish people  took care of the camp  Yugoslavian people.
>> David Bayer: In Germany  we went to this displaced persons camp.
And this particular time some other people  the men from this camp  they took a rope and somebody swam through.
Now there were some Russian women in our camp  and some of them may have been older  but again  not that much older.
What  that is the main force what they had to protect  of to keep us in this camp and to  to take care of  of the camp.
Then in the evening they put me at the end of the column when they march back to the camp.
And even in the life in the camp in itself is mu ch completely different life because they  you know  nobody worry about the life.
106*0143 53 End of Tape Two  Side B USHMM Archives RG-50.
And to the destiny when to that camp  we came like about three oclock afternoo n  you know  to that block.
So I got into this camp  and what I be gi what kind of job they give me?
It was a short period of staying in the English military camp.
