So is her son in the same place  and Henry her husband then said -- no they came and told us we have to clean the toilets because that's where our buildings  our bunk beds because I remember that Anna and Henry were there  I was here.
They had one large ghetto and they had one small ghetto.
And very soon  understanding that the other side meant the gas chamber and the crematorium.
>> Bill Benson: And then  of course  all the Jews are brought in?
The h -- th-the houses and the buildings in my mind are still the ones that are there  theyre not there any more.
And we lived there together and where we lived was on Third Street  where now is the library of New York University  the law library of the uni -- and at the time  they were already trying to empty the buildings  you know  so there were qu ite a lot of empty apartments  people whose lease had run out and they werent replacing these people  because they wanted to empty the buildings  but they had to go to the end of peoples contract.
So Warsaw was a --they claimed it was something like 65%  all the buildings were then destroyed  or 60%.
It is a small park next to a ch urch  and i-it was a street and a sidewalk a-and buildings.
Oh  those skyscrapers and the cement and buildings  I didn't like it  you remember I'm a country girl.
The Germans took everybody out from those buildings and shot everybody  even the people that were hiding in the bunkers.
I drew  I've been drawing beautiful pictures of buildings  talent from my father  that I got accustomed to seeing everyday.
And this is lunchtime  and they were pushing it down by the administration compound buildings where the prisoners would come up and got a bowl of soup or so.
I recall buildings that we re totally destroyed  with just one room still functioning or something.
But the ghetto in Užhorod was nothing but a brick manufacturer big buildings.
But there were a good many people in the buildings spoke Yiddish.
Police offi cers put on swastika bands  public buildings flew the -- the -- the swastika flag.
Before I came  dreaming  just tall buildings  you know  to see  how different would it be?
We had put flying buttresses ont o buildings as a sort of harking back to when we were building thi Greek temples.
And two little buildings at the place [indecipherable] that went to fight.
Now -- so they wanted to -- yes  and as we came to the -- closer to Krakow from the west  so the Russian engineers  if -- f-find out that they already found some installations with [ind ecipherable]  where there were important USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0052 39 buildings  but they couldnt destroy the whole thing  because its like -- like this was the end.
The address is on a little street that I cannot remember the name of  but it is -- I mean  its probably  I think probably the only really historical street of Marmande   right  and Im sure those buildings were available because they were historical document to the city -- I mean  buildings to the city.
And so the front was where our house was  our apartment.
And these were enormous buildings  I mean  stone buildings  it was beautiful.
You could have the most -- after all  the most modernist buildings in Europe were built under fascism.
I I remember very distinctly my mother scouring  looking the streets  you know  says  well  somethings on this street  but the buildings were all destroye d  so she couldnt tell where the house was  you know.
A lot of Jews live there  but its not a Jewish neighborhood.
So  there was a gas chamber as well as a crematorium?
Well  the propaganda  I mean  the the radios were blaring that it was a Jewish conspiracy  that Jews left their lights on their buildings to show where the where the city was  because of course we had blackouts at at night.
Again  walking through the streets of that place  you could here people say oh there are many Jews in town today.
They were taking over any buildings or people that people owned  like the movie theater.
Anyway  its in the desert  but the buildings are  you know  the regul ar buildings  cement  or whatever.
So anyway  so we went there and we went back to Warsaw.
This is a set of buildings crea built in the first World War  for the making of mines and torpedoes that could be loaded directly onto ships on the Potomac River.
We had seen  oh  forests to one side and then buildings.
And the one advantage we had with the Russians at that time was because grandpa was a survivor of a killing camp  th e Russians gave him preferential treatment which mean t that he could get an apartment in the bombed out buildings.
But the impressive thing to me were  of course  at that time  coming from Europe   to see these big cars in America  and these big buildings.
And nobody even noticed the beautiful big buildings there and what's going to happen there.
We moved them out into field hospitals; we burned the buildings down because they were that smelly and filthy from all the you know unclean--there's no place  no la...no facilities for latrines.
As I said  we were living in two long buildings like that.
But the and the still in these big barrels in a still  and and then we went up to the the roof  I dont and they were going to bomb the Germans when they were leaving  they were going to bomb that buildings because they didnt want the Russians to get ahold of the liquor that was in there.
In Auschwitz as well as all concentration camps  all buildings where prisoners  Haftlings  were housed  were known as blocks.
It took me a long time to find my sister in those buildings.
In fact  we lived in buildings .. the build ing that I lived in was a Berlin building and then there wa s a Hamburg building and so on and so forth and there was a group from Cologne and various parts of Germany.
After three days  when I came there  unfortunately  was fire  and most of the buildings were on the fire  I couldnt get even to our building.
It was one of the buildings that was not in the back yard  but was out in the open  incidently.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0060 6 Well  we just occu -- well  first of all  the places in Vearshmeek -- its a small town comparing to -- to the large city  where you have -- we didn t have skyscraper-scrapers  but we had buildings three  four  five story tall  and -- and in -- in Vearshmeek  the majority of the buildings were wooden buildings   short  you know  one story  or whatever it is.
Since they were the officials Oh  they had beautiful beautiful buildings.
Not just peace  but bombed out buildings and -- and bombed out apartments and -- and very little -- very little food.
They had big uh buildings where they stored all the clothes and all the shoes and all this...the jewelry.
The barracks  and and they put us there  in the barracks.
It s -- would have been an issue if  as a practical matter -- thats a -- thats theory  as a practical matter  if he had been training them in basic guard detail  where the guardi -- i-it could be guarding prisoners or guarding buildings at a site away from the concentration camp  that would have been a harder case to make.
They were there  it was prepared for us  big buildings with mattresses  wide.
I don't know anything about you  but if you go home and you would find your hometown  no matter how big or how small  totally changed in attitude  the buildings are the same  the monuments are the same  the sky is the same  everything is the same  except the attitude of your neighbors.
And I ordered my men to start going through the buildings and start cleaning them out--in other words  engaging the German soldier  the SS troopers.
And the city was completely destroyed in the war and rebuilt by the Soviets  you know  in these drab  long multi-story buildings  which fall a -- which started to fall apart the minute they were built  and they re still -- so it wa -- this was very emotional.
I would say they improved a little bit  the -- the roads  the s -- the buildings  they renovated some of that.
He went into this house  where only Jews lived  in all of the three buildings.
Uh  the Jews were not allowed anymore on the trams  not in public buildings.
Water was sometimes cut off  too  so the people who were living in the ghetto wouldn't have almost nothing  no electricity  no water  except they couldn't cut off the gas pipes and somehow some buildings had the gas 16pipes.
So  we went downstairs to the cellar and from the cellar we found there was a hole in the wall there to go to the next building and the next building  so we escaped through a few other buildings.
But along with that I think was this constant planned reduction diet  which ended up in these people dying or getting weak enough so they couldn't work  and then they were put into these -- and this is my own impression I had when I left the camp -- they were eventually put into one of these three buildings there just to be there and die and be burned through the furnaces.
And we ma -- just four or six of us marched -- with a teacher  marched towards the town a nd in town  you know and the -- I still remember the street  I could find it again  with ugly apartment buildings.
I did for a psychiatrist over in New Jersey  I did all her farm buildings  and then she had a big riding arena  and she never in the wintertime but she never had to take the horse outside.
She was taking care of buildings  and I gave her the album and she got scared later on and she burned it.
Uh  well they were less crowded because  uh  they still had the bunks but they had about three high and they still had about two people in in each one  but they weren't  they weren't as elaborate  hugh; the buildings weren't as big as the ones in the lower camp  the lower section of the camp.
You know .. they were two story buildings  it was a parade ground and typical kind of thing.
Immediately a riot started through the whole camp  and a wave rushed out of gates of the camp into town and started to break store windows  start buildings on fire  over-turned buses  attack and pummel any German passerby  quickly the town turned into an armed camp.
You know  the buildings looked gray  and here are these gorgeous red flags with white and black on them.
Well  let me say this: That the courtroom had b een one of the buildings in which operations in support of the war had taken place.
And they didnt go to the area they promised  they didn't look at a list   they came to one street  where my boyfriend and I was hiding and they surrounded two big buildings.
Bergen was farther  the brick buildings  and this is where they took the sick people.
When the action began it was too late already for the Farber family to get there because the Germans were rounding up the Jews already and they couldn't go through the streets  so you know Uncle Farber and his two 9 daughters climbed up on the roof of the building and there was a big chimney like the European buildings have  those wide chimneys  hid behind the chimney and it didn't take long.
And then they had other buildings where  lik e the prisoners stayed in  inside of that gate.
We would have to leave the buildings and if even one cigarette or one potato would be found  that would be the end.
So well that snipers  placed in high point s in those buildings  for a few days did not even allow the German soldiers and divisions to enter that way.
She lived in Shtrashona too -- Shtrashona  I dont remember exactly the number  but it was a yard and four big buildings.
You could see across the bank and you could see buildings.
I don't know how many buildings we could see that was under construction.
Of course  when you enter  there's a photog raph here  which has a couple of buildings that are very old-fashioned.
Well  when I was transf erred to Budapest  immediately I starte d to teach geography  they had these so-called pioneer houses  these were buildings wher e the kids can come back in the afternoon and depending on their interests  join groups  stu dy groups.
I wound up working in one of the buildings that was renovated into aŠoffices for Oskar Schindler.
>> Bill Benson: These work details  of course  they were incredibly hard work  taking down damaged buildings and all of that.
And it was purchased by– the buildings  not the minerals  but the town of Da vid  the ridge around it and the homes that were there were  was purchased by a small group of bus inessmen here in Prestonsburg.
He bought up 32 or 33 apartment buildings and he crammed as many Jewish families as possible.
And we lived in an apartment right in the middle of the city.
A LEED is an international standard for rating energy efficient buildings.
We walked in the streets and go into buildings and see if we can help as much as we could with just get living out from under the dead or whatever we can do.
And we then gather ed old mattresses and stuff and we stayed in that building and there was another building  other small out buildings a nd thats where we stayed at the time.
Acro ss the street from one of the streets in the ghetto  you had buildings where there were lots and lots of Russian POWs  and they were begging for bread.
Nothing  except that it was an interesting  it was a German city.
Yeah  yeah  but no  I had I did work for this Amish contractor in Lancaster County   who we did work in new y we built all we built was foreign buildings; big riding arenas  stuff like that.
In the Jewish buildings there was always one family who were Christian  mostly the super  and in this particular building the super was a Mr. Varga.
My mother wasnt working  she helped out a little bit my father  and then she took care of the tenants there  the -- the -- her buildings .
Well  I was overwhelmed by the -- by the bi g buildings.
See  the hills were there  the buildings were there  the trees were there  but the heart and soul was gone and all those who could have made a difference  namely people and faces and arms clutching you -- that was not there.
All the -- you know  the Fortune 500 companies  or whatever  of the world  were building there  and they werent just building buildings  they were build ing like whole plazas  and its ju -- tremendous  un-unbelievable the building going on  which was -- there was nothing going on in -- in 1989.
Was the ghetto in the town or did they transport you?
And people  non -Jews  had to move out of those apartments and Jewish moved in.
When we were walking around the city buildings  and we had this–bumped into this woman who was Jewish or who knew the Jewish– had some connection.
all the buildings  so it says brick layer  brick layer  for whom do you build these...these buildings.
He told hi s neighbor Constanti Pocharlie about the coughing in your -- in our buildings.
Uh so  uh that any terrain would have to be measured...uh all the roads and all the buildings or everything  and sent; because on it  that basic map  they would do the planning what's going to be there in the future.
All I knew was that they had ga thered them all up in these buildings and so on  the SS people  and they had their war crim es trials there.
Were there many apartment buildings there  many different kinds of people?
In my hometown I can very definitely say this was a -- a -- a totally untenable lie because the buildings that had burned down were -- were very badly damaged.
By the law of averages  no  in a normal situation  by the law of averages  there are two or three bathrooms per building  the buildings are very close  so if this is lined up  it wouldn't have that.
We were at first we were so-called second camp  but in the first camp they had much more modern buildings  or some kind of civilization type of thing  and the scho ol started  there were classes  and And this was all under the British jurisdiction.
And when they came to our block and came into the yard  they start looking around  they see too many people because people came from other buildings so they figured they'd scare and they start shooting.
You know  like several -- ac tually several apartment buildings they had taken over.
And its like apartment buildings and you know  you I  of course  pick up the milk in the morning fu you know  in a bucket  and so on  and I dont remember much else.
It meant one thing  returning the apartments or returning the homes or the buildings to the Jews.
Everyt hing of any value was taken out: pipes  balconies  roofing  upholstery  and so on  and then the buildings were blown up.
The buildings were crumbling to our feet  enormous tons of flames were licking the sky and painting it in other worldly colors of iridescence  plumes of smoke.
They took over Polish buildings  had Polish supervisors  but the ownership was German now?
And from one of the buildings we saw there were schlep carts and we saw people gathering and the two of us would look out the window  you know hidden behind the curtain  to make sure we dont see our mother or our father.
When you went to your hometown in Poland  did you see a ny of the houses  or buildings you remember  places where your family -- Oh  sure. --
German troops occupied Hungary in March 1944  and the Pick family was first forced to move into buildings marked with the yellow star  like that seen in this photo.
A qualified architect  a man whose purpose is to ra ise buildings from th e earth to serve man  to make something beautiful  using all of his knowledge against the works of his 9 colleagues; he walked and classified: this is to be blown up  because it has value.
What I do remember is this particular platform was at the edge of a military installation w ith brick buildings ; in other ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 20 words  permanent buildings.
And so instead of us being ushered into buildings where we will be staying  these were like just a carport...just a covering to protect us somewhat from the rain and the sunshine  the strong sun.
So we built in one -- one part of the basement was so well hidden that we really couldnt figure out what happened and so they built their own hiding place with the camouflage doors.
When we -- I think there was a old Polish committee lady who took three of us and I dont even know which train depot we went to  but oh  the traffic  we were just ogling the traffic and all USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0023 92 the -- all of the people on the sidewalks and all those buildings and all this crowdedness.
In this building  like in many buildings in Warsaw  the outside walls are very thick and there was no refrigeration at that time  so usually underneath a window there would be a little cabinet that served as a refrigerator.
And what kind of drawings what kind of buildings was he making the drawings for?
We went through the city which was under siege and you could see the demolished buildings  people dying  horses of some Russian soldiers.
They knew that they were already there  they knew they were guards  because they got them out of the guard the guard buildings.
For security purposes  they emptied buildings with windows overlooking the road  the whole business.
Everything for the buildings what they built over there - some houses.
And  you know  I told you he was in the lumber business  so he got in the construction of ma ny buildings.
It's like when you see in the pictures or something -- like  if you see little buildings that -- little -- like  you build for children in the back.
And I went -- I vaguely remember that you had to open -- it was a bunch o f buildings on a narrow street but you had to open a gate.
I am told there was a slogan  a motto that was displayed at the main road leading to the school buildings as you would approach the field because we had a 50 acre farm there and the name was  said in Hebrew .
Of course I had still a certain strength in me  and then uh uh then we were...we entered the factory area where where you had these num...numerous buildings there under construction.
We had several forts: number 4  number 5th and number 9th Fort.
My men and the survivors started going through all the buildings  all the closets  and everything else.
I'll make that real short  and that is the fact that Theresienstadt way back when  in the 1890s  was an Austria -Hungarian town  a Garrison town  big barracks  small buildings for the relatives.
Yes  I lived on a street called Pilnikarska  which was several apartment buildings  almost close to the center of the city  and we lived in a two story building.
This arrangement with the 300 people only limping along  working shortage of materials for producing the pots and pans; the buildings which were undertaken for the larger complex which was going to produce armaments or some parts of armaments was no longer being completed.
I know that there were some German soldiers who came on convalescent leave so it was sort of a R & R rest and recuperation place and I dont remember how many but there have been about forty or fifty or so who occupied one or two buildings there and if I remember correctly  they had all been wounded on the Russian front and so forth and they basically just wanted to get well and they didn't want to have trouble with anybody.
One was a little ghetto  and one was the big ghetto.
As a matter of fact  after we were liberated they took everybody to Bergen  but in the meantime the British helped us clean up some of -- they whitewashed some of the buildings  and I stayed another month or so  maybe another few weeks.
No  no  we slept in the -- originally there were Jewish buildings  maybe two family in each.
The Dutch compound  we were put in the caserne  that -- not -- not barracks  barracks were flat  us ually  and caserne was pretty 27 impressive stone buildings with courtyar ds  and surrounding were -- originally were made for quarters for soldiers.
We figured out that we are going in one of our own buildings in which we gave the the...an apartment as a superintendent to one of my husband's workers.
Interview with Barbara Syska October 22  2014 6 And we lived in the buildings close to the palace.
Ma The on the only thing we knew  that we saw some buildings  but where or what  I couldnt tell.
And we looked out and the buildings all around were destroyed.
Explain to me what a ghetto is  and how the Germans set them up.
No  it was not mod see  there was not like here they didnt build so many  you know  they had the buildings forever  you know  theyre staying and they renovate sometimes  you know  they paint it inside  sometimes outside  you know.
As a Interview with John Lang October 15  2010 58result  the synagogue was ransacked  but not burned do wn  because had it been torched  buildings and surrounding buildings would have also gone down; they werent going to do that.
Paris  if you ever go to Paris  you can see bullet holes all over the big buildings.
One one bullet is to destroy tw o buildings  o-or half a street [indecipherable] because they were hiding and they shooting through the window.
There were no buildings around  there were fields and roads  and there came a man on a bicycle.
The only thing that I learned later  th much later  while my mother was still alive here in the United States  is that the building in the middle of the courtyard it was a couple of series of small buildings within the courtyard  which were quite old and I think theyre designated as historical monuments now.
Th-The kind -- th-the way Kristallnacht played itself out in our -- in -- in my friends -- in my friends parents house is that all the Jewish families who lived in that building -- now  buildings -- I have a memory of a huge building  bu t m -- there were no huge bil -- there was one [indecipherable] in Vienna.
And come out and here all these low buildings  except for Medical Center  I see the first sign I see is Broadway.
It was a large building  so ŠŠ it was one of the tall office buildings.
Oh so you -- now youve sold the buildings as well?
cause I probably couldnt get enough of those big buildings  and the masses of people.
And then  since the the the th ey close buildings  they started to burn too.
The buildings in Warsaw were built in such a way that you had front of the building facing the street and each building had a square courtyard that you reach through the gate inside.
How many people they can put in one room or two rooms in the buildings  they put us.
We were going on Wierzbowa Street to Marshall Jozef P ilsudski Square to visit my aunt  passing the burned buildings of Theater Square  when on the other side of the street I saw a man who appeared to be drunk.
Its to make shelves in one of the buildings  Kompu-Stego .
Uh...in...in March 1944  and I hid for one week in the Spanish extraterritorial buildings.
I looked and I said -- it's interesting because what you saw was a large  flat area and at the edges of that area were remnants of buildings b ut standing buildings.
What the Germans did  they built those V2  it's V2 things they were building out there  but we were building the buildings for that.
So  instead  they crammed then the remaining Jews at that time simply into a much smaller number of apartment buildings.
When when you see when the two systems me et  the th-the monument of the communism  versus against the the the capitalism  so to speak  of the skyscrapers  you know  na modern buildings.
>> Bill Benson: After a time they began pointing out who were Jews in the town.
At that time  some of the houses are already empty  because that process of sending Jews to the death chambers in Treblinka was vacated a lot of space  leaving space in the buildings.
There was Polish resistance in both parts of the main streets of it was called at the time in Rovno  I remember there was a militar y church where they were hiding  the Polish police was hiding and as the Russian soldiers with their equipment were coming in they were shooting at them from behind the buildings and some of them got killed an d then they killed all the police that were shooting at them.
And we were shocked one day was I was down by the gate cause there was a lot of commotion and stuff and the Germans were coming by  and there are tanks rolling by a nd everything else  and I think Captain he and Captain Daniels was down there close to me too  and the German guards all of a sudden were running to a one the buildings  their their little guard shack there.
All th e Jews  160 000 of them in Budapest  were concentrated in 1900 rather dilapidated buildings.
But the first result from that crash burned Š out of the six buildings that were potentially there  ther e were only two left.
But uh a bunch of us--us  me and my parents and my brother as bystand- ers sort of  made arrangements to prevent being evacu- ated by hiding out in a sub-basement if you will of one of the large buildings that was there.
When I started out I - being totally alone of course - I only had two old schoolmates of mine I had contact with and who helped me out; one of whom was a dentist who took me in and I slept in his back room in his office for the first few months in New York in the - during the hottest months of the year of course - on the bottom of one of those 50 story buildings.
The buildings were apparently  what I learned later  vacated with everybody who lived in the building and given to the Spanish Legation.
This is a big town and you did see lots of smoke  lots of buildings.
It didn't happen that way to me  but buildings around the corner were.
The buildings were built when I visit after the war  the walls were most likely close to a meter wide.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0044 12 We were just overwhelmed  and then my si ster started feeling very sick  and we tried to get her in the hospital  but there was no hospitals there  there were just makeshift buildings  mattresses on the floors  and the people were laying just covered up with sheets.
We lived in a the way I remember  a two story house.
All the nicer buildings The beautiful building where you didnt walk with shoes.
Had my apartment  and Ill even -- Mr. Funkin  his family from his life had two big buildings  where I was there managing  too.
The three buildings were in the same place where I lived be fore and I came back to the place and there I was with this friend.
And there were some places that they were bombing  they exploded  and people were killed.
By the way  we had bunks  10 them in a bunk. --
There was many buildings and they start to bring in from the east like civil peoples. [
Here  every morning  you run out to see what the new announcement hangs on the buildings or on -- and every day or every second it was always something new.
No  and that was strange  because somebody from that office  which was right across  as we kept hearing the screaming from there  came over and my father became so scared that he got the diarrhea and was sitting in an outhouse  and they went by and pulled the people from the next two buildings.
When buildings were bombed in Berlin  she reported to the local Gestapo of whatever housing committee there was  and said that she lost all of her identification in the bombing.
So I saw the French police dragging little kids with their mother  little bundles in the street taking them I didn't know wher e  but I saw them  you know  at night  coming out of buildings and walking in the middle of the street with those French police around them.
And we went to this apartment house that was down the street and in that apartment house we went to that apartment buildi ng that was standing.
We didn't want to go but still some buildings were still remaining there  and then all of a sudden we come in on the highways where the German Army with this music with this big truck of and tanks.
She worked for  I think the air force -- I mean  the air -- the navy air in the temporary buildings [indecipherable] the Constitution.
It -- we had the in Proushinna there was -- call it a -- on the marketplace over here  like all the -- you got your shopping centers  but those -- we had that -- we had -- in the center of the city was a marketplace and there were about - a big buildings with probably 100 stores -- you know  little stores and each store -- we mostly  mostly be Jewish merchants.
It was a very residential area and there were lots of Jews living in that area.
So but Jewish people did who lived--they had houses in the city.
I -- I looked at streets  you know  the main streets where there was lots of business  where they had lots of stores  and I know fortunately  or unfortunate  or some wartby whatever it is  those buildings and -- and houses  and -- and businesses belonged to Jewish people.
So Berlin was like any othe r big city  but very beautiful.
Well  there w as a sm relatively small building  but it was attached on both sides  to other buildings.
This is how the ghetto was in relationship to the city.
And February 5th  I remember this like today  everybody out of the buildings  everybody assemble in the street.
And many times I would run away from home and slept in -- underground -- you know big buildings  they have basements.
There's a lot of bullet holes in buildings in Paris itself f rom the uprising.
And a lit later -- >> Fred K ahn: Two buildings they owned and she had to sell it first.
So  eventually they let us keep our shoes and they let us keep belts  belts or suspenders and they eventually sent us to a shower  which was a real shower and gave us prison clothes  rags for shorts and rags for shirts and marched us into one of those storage buildings  couldn't call them barracks  they didn't have any windows  no nothing  they were like storage and in it there were no bunks  but storage bins.
The women ah  living under these horrible horrible conditions  they were all gotten out of there  they were all cleaned up  they were all deloused  and we just burned the buildings down.
Uh  it reminded me of chicken coops on a big chicken ranch  and  uh  there was about seven rows of them and about ten buildings in each row.
In Amsterdam the buildings that have flats are differently configured from the way we know them here.
No  they had they had some they ha d nicer buildings to live in  they didnt they didnt stay in these in these shacks that they were there.
It was the place where they collected arms  the Russian arms and put them in one or two buildings.
>> Bill Benson: In the ghetto there was a large wall built around the ghetto to enclose you.
Seco nd  the dirty snow on the ground and the dark brick buildings which I was not -- my eyes were not used to.
They were the they had about 30 buildings throughout town  which were run by the Swiss Red Cross  like the Swedish buildings  this but this was not within that enclosure  you know.
That was our neighbor  Adam Smalleara  who walked by your hiding place to his farm buildings every day.
Flocks of planes  the sky was black with planes  bombs were falling all around us  buildings were crumbling to our feet.
Buildings were bombed out  there was rubble all over  there was no food available.
He came  his parents had moved from Vienna to Berlin  they were Austrian Jews  but the parents were  of course  born before World War I like all of our parents and before World War I  the Austro-Hungarian Empire included southern Poland and particular ly  most of Galicia  the province  and his parents actually were orthodox Jews from Ga licia who had  however  left there I think before the war already and settled in Vienna and so they were then  by citizenship  they were Austrian Jews and they came to Berli n  it might sound strange si nce Austria at that time was still a democracy  but his father had some business  I think he sort of administered buildings and as an Austrian  he was not subject  he was a foreigner  foreign Jews were not subject to all these antisemitic laws.
These remains  the corpses  you can see were huddled together  and died together and there's nothing left of the buildings except the ashes of these burned up bodies.
9 >> Sylvia Rozines: And we came up from the two camp buildings and just stood on the street to be happy that we are free.
Like the House of Fascism in Modena  probably the most modernist building in Europe of its time  yes.
International ghetto consisted of buildings which were nominally under the control of the Swedes  the Swiss  the Spanish and Portuguese and the Vatican.
If t here were no particular jobs for Jewish people  then they had them cleaning the sidewalks.
And then there was like a house for the SS where Dobberke lived  and a whole house for Wirtschaft  57 you know  where they cleaned and where the steam was generated  and where the laundry building was really huge buildings.
I remember my first ride in Central Park  and when I looked at the tall buildings and each building had a light in the window and I said to myself  there is a family living every place behind that light.
And by that time the buildings had a Jewish star on it.
I came home that day and we lived in an apartment building  it was a a block  four buildings around a big park .
When I watched the buildings collapse  and I knew that thousands of people are there collapsing  I-I had no emotional res its like  it was too big.
Now I'm trying just to think if there's anything that I can think of -- Well  then you were moving along -- Then we saw the piles of bodies next to the buildings  some of the buildings  of these skeletons of the bodies.
The machine guns that were meant near the police first  we shot them out immediately because we made the forest  by the time they realized it was an attack  and to muster the police who were asleep  and the Germans  we already were near the buildings  surrendered and hand grenades began flopping from everywhere.
And when I arrive at this certain famous school of architecture  Raleigh  North Carolina   which was formed in 48 with a couple of a couple  both architects from Poland   who were here to work on a team for to design the United Nations buildings.
So the Mennonites took us in for 2 months  and they...we slept in their church buildings  in their homes.
The papers reported it  and people were standing in front of the newspaper buildings to read the bulletins.
Only a few buildings and in the surroundings suitable for ourselves were left standing.
I remember we moved into the shipyard apartments  which as I recall  were three separate buildings  large buildings.
The sky was blue with lightning every second  and the rain poured down  and it thundered b-between those buildings  it sounded -- it was like hell had broken loose  it was like God himself sort of thundered out on -- on us for -- you know  it was very strange.
I found uh in one of the uh  buildings  in Munich  a large uh- uh Polish Hebrew library that the Nazis had uh had uh confiscated.
I had been so absorbed first in living the Swedish way with the Swedish schools  then living a normal life in Goteborg that the year and a half I didn't remember the road  I didn't recall the road really  or didn't remember the buildings on the road going from the from the railroad station to where we were staying but when we came to where we were staying I remembered it all.
I was always  I dont like to live in groups  so we had two buildings.
And a woman  I remember her  a kind of heavy set lady climbed out of the truck and started to run toward one of the buildings.
In some buildings  11  12  15  sometimes even more people lived in one room.
Was it only apartment buildings there  or Yeah  apartment buildings  and it was besides a waterway  and there was also causeway  and and [indecipherable] now.
We were walking through bodies of dead men and dead horses  buildings were collapsing as we were walking.
They were making building blocks for the bridges and the highways and also for stone buildings that they  uh  were putting up here and there.
When we a rrived at the station  Auschwitz  which is in --------------  we saw that huge sign  AUSCHWITZ  written on the second floor of that uh  Auschwitz  or that uh station bldg and we didn't know where we are  where we were  where  we thought we  we came to Germany already.
We lived in the house that was adjacent to the synagogue  a big courtyard out front.
Because its just these -- you know  its weird  because its like these -- these small brick buildings with grass and -- and paths in between them.
Well  we had a lot of the idea of the from the movies  you know  and from the news there was a newsreel late in one of the movies  so you got the idea of the big buildings  and the and the beautiful New York and all of those skies what do you call them?
And there I met a number of architects who were there design ing buildings already  and highways for after the war  and I met people there from the the British architects board  and we became very good friends.
Because it has a lot more meaning to me than other government buildings.
And we knew that they had put some buildings on fire and someone in our group of 68 people -- a woman started yelling  \ I don't want to die  to suffocate here.
You mentioned that there was a gas chamber; there was a crematorium  and there was administration buildings.
These were the ones they called the starred buildings  or Jewish buildings.
And as we were walking  these shrapnels were hitting buildings  and whole walls came down  tumbling in front of us.
In the daytime not as much and at night we knew how to go through buildings or alleyways where we would not encounter anybody.
And there were these little round buildings where people would rest their arms and shoot at I don't know what  game of some kind.
Now  none of the buildings where we live d  you know  were hit or blown up.
Learned how to blow up the things that I had built  and which was a terrible thing in my mind--when we had to destroy buildings and bridges and even trees which we blew down occasionally to  uh  to make the war effort a little more  uh  well  not useful but to learn what we had to do in service  in 2 combat.
So here on the outskirts of one of Germany's greatest cities  world famous for its beautiful buildings  its culture  its monuments to great men \  Leipzig  that is  \ there stood a monument to a new type of German culture that the world should never forget.\
They used to make all kind of machines and what is it called  what they have at when they build  you know the -- the buildings and they have the big A crane?
As I described it was located inside of a mill and somehow make my way into one of the mill buildings where lots of stuff was beingŠwas laying around.
And as many buildings as he could buy up  these buildings were in the ghetto.
Now  I'm not sure if that was the hospital back there  because on the map that I was sent  it showed the ho spital in a more area where there were all buildings around it  but that wasn't the case where I landed there.
Jew Jews had a saying that was very popular  you have the streets  but we have the buildings on them.
Our ghetto was on the small part  it was a very small section of the ghetto.
The next time if they wanted to liquidate the ghetto s they have only two small buildings or three buildings to go in there and arrest them and take them out and kill them.
We were on one side of this very big area  within the factory buildings -- yard  and -- and they had to get into her place on the other side.
I mean  we were dressed in what we could find in the adjoining abandoned buildings  you know  nightshirts or gowns or whatever it was.
In an old -- I mean old house  old building in New York that overlooked a co urtyard  and you know  all the old buildings  the way they are.
I didn't hear that during the night  and I couldn't be lieve this  so uh what I did was I went to my synagogue where I had been married and I saw that the the the the flames were coming out from the roof  from the cupola...beautiful edifice  and the fire engines were standing by doing nothing  only protecting the buildings next to it that the fire shouldn't extend to them.
Some were in their bunks  they were they were stacked bunks.
They didn't pay us for the work  but I was glad to go to work for them so they wouldn't catch me to work different work like cleaning the streets  cleaning the buildings.
One was a little ghetto  and one was the big ghetto.
And they took us to a couple of buildings  small buildings  different rooms.
No  in this time they di -- she didnt hide  because they pick ed up the two buildings and this area where my mother was  they didnt -- they didnt touch anybody from there.
Of course  we still went to school for a couple of months and...uh...but as...uh... time went on  the Germans started occupying...occupying...uh...pri...buildings that...like school buildings  offices  government offices  and so on  and they settled themselves in our school.
Among the buildings they bombed was a building where the SS headquarters was.
Nothing was really down other than one portion was hit and there were some other buildings that were attached to our house and we checked that and I remember my brother said well  there's not much damage to our hiding place.
Oh  work  usually very hard work  field wo rk  or buildings  and we have to under the sky -- it means outside the houses  it was winter.
The mo onlight  I remember driving on riding on the train basically  lookin g out and seeing all of these ghostly white buildings out there  just just the ruins  huh  of th-the the destruction of Aachen.
But the train started rolling to a uh side truck  and eventually we came in the front of 3 large buildings.
You will not survive here  there is no food  there going to come and raze all those buildings.
At that time the university had classes in some half fallen down buildings on F Street in northwest Washington.
I got a sack of coal and had to bring them to the buildings where they had central heating from the truck to the building and the -- but the other one  I was much worse.
I don't know  and he called up the Germans and he found out that a lot of men  mostly men  a few women but mostly men  were picked up who were healthy looking  put in in a car...in a trunk...a truck  truck...and uh was taken up to clear and clean some house on the bigger side where we have villas  private homes  not uh building...apartment buildings  and this what they do  so he said find out where.
What happened  a lot of these places didn't use steel like they use in the buildings today  and they had the basement several floors down.
So tell us  so that now is not from the eyes of a child  but so that people will know  these are not just any old places in buildings  in Polish history.
Well  the other one tha -- the other thing that they have there at Auschwitz is one of the -- one of the buildings is devoted only to collections of things.
It was just in a big  brick manufacturing place with nothing but concrete buildings.
but they had them surrounding the -- the buildings -- I see.
I found out after the war when I went back  I found out subsequently that the Belgians  th e fire-fighters were given strict orders not to make any attempt to contain the fire unless it started touching buildings.
So  we had the place  one of the major hiding place was this two apartment buildings in Ghetto and under the apartment building was a basement and from the basement they dug out a long tunnel  and there they made like a shelter  like a nuclear shelter  to hide.
A lot of cement buildings all around and di -- very dilapidated.
At that time they evacuated some slum buildings and put all the Jews in there.
The Polish public schools in Warsaw were all the same  you know  the buildings we re built by the same -- in the same type of architecture.
These were apartment buildings where at least 50% of the tenants were already Jews and then also  you couldn't by any means  of course  displace a German family in such a house.
Its not a thats not we dont have an apartment buildings.
Some of the things that even transpired within the camp  because under certain conditions  certain supplies and things were brought in by the people that lived in the town of Dachau  so they also saw the buildings.
And the same evening  Marek Edelman buried Michal in the court  which now  later on  were ruins because the buildings were burned and so on.
It was hard for us to imagine what America would look like and arrivin g New York is so overwhelming  all these buildings.
I want to be proud of the idea that I survived  and we have seen a time where we can come back to these buildings  and salute the freedom we have in America  and the freedom that it should be of democracy throughout the world  that yes  there is a -- a repayment day to be proud of  that we ch anged the evil days  and this is what it was  my message in the same way when I came to speak in front of the justice depart -- justices in Springfield  Illinois  when the Nazis wanted to march  so if youre ever interested  go ahead  get the movie  ﬁSkokie ﬂ and youll see Danny Kaye play Harold Zissman in it.
And t-to put up defenses as it were against -- ba -- sandbags against th-the prospect of -- of other public monuments and buildings being bombed in subsequent days.
Is that when youre do guarding those two buildings  this police duty in Musocco   Musocco ?
We had to go every summer for practice and one of the summers  for two months  I worked in the railway sta tion in what is called the maintenance section wh ich maintained the track and the bridges and the  and the buildings.
Were there banners  Nazi banners hanging from buildings in your town?
I was staying in the city a long time because I went to some people...uh...uh...my... with my husband  my late husband was...had connections with the Lithuanian because he build for the government  they build ...many buildings . . .
And you'll find out why in Warsaw  because the buildings there they got into  but not in Birkenau  uh-uh.
I also remember that across the street from us in our apartment building and everywhere there were swastika flags that hung from the third floor or the fourth floor of the buildings and it reached to within four or five feet of the sidewalk.
But then at night we slept -- my mother had a brother who lived nearby but outside of the Jewish area.
Auschwitz had new buildings on the side there -- [indecipherable] they had a womens -- right. --
It was a big factory with huge grounds and some kind of buildings for the processing and building -- making of the bricks.
For there were three  like buildings around a courtyard  and I lived on the third floor in one of them  on the the site where there was no building like this  there was a small building of three stores only  or what do what shops in th e lower floor  and then two floors of apartments  which belonged to my grandfather.
When we were going from door to door  about our ad possibilities of being hired  and we s entered some very elegant buildings by there of there were office buildings and elegant people were walking  then we were in a sense  we could walk wherever we wanted.
There was a guard watching the area where the buildings where we were actually housed  Russian stayed there and people who worked for them.
You could see buildings that had been b-bombed out  you could see fires on the street.
So my new assignment was that I had to form a new platoon because a lot of them already went out in the open and got jobs as accountants or whatever it is in the civilian life  and they were discharged from this staff  which it was also in one of the buildings inside Grodno.
The camp is that side  on the other side is the crescent of these large buildings which were SS barracks  which now house the museum  library  etcetera.
For instance  we...we needed some meat for Passover  so my in-laws sent with a cert....by a certain man  who was the superintendent of our buildings in Novi Sad  they sent up...I don't know...geese and whatever we needed.
And here  they were  like  demolishing you know  out in buildings becaus e they were not secure.
And it has the name of this smaller - it was just really not a camp  it was an apartment building or a series of apartment buildings in the French or Russian sector of Berlin.
We werent in th e job of taking buildings  or taking making our own assignments.
Among the buildings they destroyed was the building where the SS chief had his headquarters.
Then began to see a lot of bomb damage or some kind of damage to buildings  basically.
I remember when I opened the door  my apartment -- or I don't know  it was a house -- I stood ther e and the buildings looked so huge  like never-ending  very tall buildings.
So all kinds of buildings that are in a normal city?
He was looking over my shoulder; and he was apparently looking at my men  who were still...some of them running 6 through the buildings  uh  there.
And then distribute the clandestine press every place we c ould  in the fabrica factory  office  buildings  school.
They had buildings by Gropius   and I had a very privileged childhood.
See  there was a gate here  and then back here  they had the furnaces right here  and and then then they were over some more buildings here.
>> Bill Benson: In the place where you lived  Konigsberg  how large was the Jewish community there?
No -- you could not arrange for an apartment  there was no such thing as apartment.
And that was used for the V2 rocket engines up there on the buildings.
I was able to go in these buildings  these warehouses  and by that time I learned the trick of tying my pants at th e bottom  whatever pants I had at that time and filling up my pantsŠ Pant leg.
So  what they did just a couple of weeks before they got me  they surrounded  they had a very nice a sort of a house with farm buildings  because they had a little farm  they surrounded this and they started shooting without asking.
And at this point it was obvious that many buildings were bombed out and sometimes people died.
They took me to Kreinkinbau  that means hospital in Auschwitz located -- buildings  number of buildings  I think 24 or 25 something like that.
And we both have the same reaction  that it would be horrible to go back to Italy and be poor  because this is after the war  and everything is still but to go back to Italy and be who we were  with all the losses  because buildings were hit  things were not looked after  properties had to be put in other names [indecipherable] the Calabresi things to survive  because they didnt fit to that category  and so on.
I would say maybe here  these tw o buildings  one was for just Czech  Slovak people  and one was for the German Dutch children.
In the summer of 1941  perhaps even in the la te spring of 1941  the Topor ol organization  that organization that was dedicated to the agricultural work  sees an opportunity of utilizing all empty and vacant lots of buildings or just squares -- to utilize them in growing vegetables for the starving ghetto.
The buildings were made of stone and therefore keeping things cool and the walls are very wide.
When they came in Agrinio and they -- they loved the fact that the Italians were so afraid of the resistance and they had their buildings fortified  and with all kinds of guns around them  and they wanted to give a good lesson to the resistance.
In those days  you know  in Poland  not like here  you know sky -- you know sky rise buildings  this -- the -- the tall rise building was seven story building.
Not always that we had something to burn  but there was enough wood laying around because of the demolition we did on those buildings  so it didn't cost anything to the Germans.
There were three buildings that were left and one of the buildings was our building  where we lived before.
So where we slept  it was an old building  like the buildings here in Washington  old stone building  three story.
Well  when I was transferred to Budapest  immediately I started to teach geography  they had these so-called pioneer houses  these were buildings where the kids can come back in the afternoon and depending on their interests  join groups  study groups.
They lived on the lower floors and there was a yard in the back  rectangular yard.
There were still buildings; and in those buildings the underground put in  you know  our...the  the civilian clothes for us.
And old -fashioned  maybe 100 years ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 21 old  buildings  in the basement  they didn't have any concrete.
All of a sudden...and I ordered my men then... Now  [when] we got to the buildings  I said  \ Some of you guys start going through these...this building over here.
They were wooden buildings  not very large at all  and they had --these were just for sleeping  and they had bunk beds  as I rememb er it  four high with just a few inches between each two bunks so that you --you just knew --the re was just no way a --a person could turn over in the bunk.
So they killed some of the civilian workers  and I think some nuns  and they set fire in the building  and the German saw the fire -- In your building  in your -- Some of the buildings  you know.
In 2004  I was back to see it  and the buildings just the same  and here I am  here.
I think its after after the war crimes people got out  a lot of it was torn down  like I said about this man telling me a lot of a lot of buildings were disposed of.
Russians------ Tell me once more how the buildings at Treblinka were laid out.
That friend of mine who called me  \ Tom  Tom \  you know excuse me I took him to one of the buildings  safe buildings  and he didn't  naturall y  have papers because I told you that I took him out without papers.
We went from Warsaw to this town where my parents were too.
I had from one of my competitors when I wandered out of one of the buildings it was  a cigarette box mixed from gold.
These  two huge  we used to call it blocks  apartment buildings were also occupied.
There was a network of bunkers built throughout portions of the ghetto that was for entrenchment and for hiding.
Well  as I just described the house that we lived in  there was a building right next to it.
First of all  Shanghai  the waterfront is called the Bund  which prior to World War had these giant  beautiful buildings  high rise buildings right around  they look very impressive.
It was a house which it was there one floor  there was three apartments.
Used to bring wood into town  he used to sell the wood  and then used to -- a lot of buildings was going on  people were building homes  we used to deliver gravel  sand  stones  to customers.
But that that is where where the Swedish embassy bought all those buildings.
Boys and girls were separate in different buildings -- and we had both our religious education as well as secular education during the nine years of day school.
Sections of the of th of of of of some some buildings were bombed  but most of the bombs fell on downtown.
And again  in the -- in the -- in the stories that were published  again its of my family  right  and all of it tracing to the -- my grandfather and th-the -- the photos of the ceremony  of the monument on the back of -- of the -- one of the buildings  the synagogue of my grandfather  and here is also in one of the other newspapers  several of them  you know  were sent to me  is this Christian couple.
Pause) I'm not sure I could describe the uh the uh interior of the of these buildings.
My 44 grandmother  who was also in her 80s was put to work cleaning the mortar off bricks from bombed out buildings.
They left four buildings and I went back to the place where I lived.
The fire department came out to protect the buildings around s o the fire wouldn't spread.
And it was some time later when we actually managed to get into odd buildings I looked up that had been put empty  that what they do  that one or two of the Jews might get in there.
This is a place where at first 160 000 people were there and now there's 800 a dults and 11  12 children hidden in the basement of the one of the buildings where those 800 people were .
Modern buildings and -- and the -- the bus runs through there and so on.
They were still in their buildings but people 12 vile (Hungarian) 13 dive bomber (German) 14 Raoul Wallenberg 11 were moving from one to the other in case they got this protectorate.
The Viennese love to put plaques on buildings and the allies apparently didnt bomb Vienna til rather late in the war so the building had a plaque on it  said this was bombed by the allies in 1943.
A little bit later  they brought their families and they took over the buildings where the Polish officers used to live with their families which was evacuated already and they settled there.
laughs) But there were cottages which were brick buildings and we were assigned in cottages by gender.
And she told us to forget about all that  because we were going to be living in centrally heated houses or buildings  and we would be -- we would not be needing that kind of underwear any more.
I had only known buildings where you walk in and youre in the living room and dining room and the kitchen and out the door into the garden and upstairs were the bedrooms.
Also I remember running for about twenty blocks and the last few blocks the buildings were ablaze and we couldnt crossing.
Course a lot of the buildings were already there  they were good buildings  some of them were three and four stories of brick constructi on  in fact.
We looked like real flies t -- t-to see the buildings like that  so big and tall and so many.
What do you remember about the conditions there  at the camp?
There were quite a few people who  who were benefiting by the war but most of the people were just struggling along and  of course they  they did not see too many Jews because the  the  the Jews were either in  in the Swedish or no  the Swiss Protectorate buildings.
We saw the whole...the buildings  everything was..was either hole the buildings.
>> Bill Benson: What were the buildings or houses like in the ghetto that you were living in?
Two or three barracks buildings  open ground  and [Ahem] and one of the buildings  there was an opening and uh  it looked as though it was a place where they kept cord wood  but there wasn't any cord wood there  there's just bo- bodies piled up like cord wood.
However  I was very much impressed with all the tall buildings.
And but he said it theyre theyre all changed  they tear a lot of buildings down.
I worked for him for year s before I went into the army after I graduated from high school for years -- for one year  I guess  and we built many farm buildings: Barns and corn cribs and hog houses.
Anyway  the boys went back to school  and right around the corner there was a -- there were buildings of the university  and they became a -- a -- a pr -- a prisoner of war camp for -- for Germans.
And I cleaning this  and walking around this -- this buildings  I entered the room where from the darkness of this room came a -- a woman.
We were very much in hiding  living in an attic apartment  and that's where we were.
The air force used it to put their bombs into certain buildings there.
Uh...It seemed to have been the inner city which is an unusual place fo r a workshop because these were splendid buildings.
And then for a while I did  and another groups of maybe 30 guys  we had to find transformers in buildings   electrical transformers  and we had to put them on trucks.
They used to clean big buildings like -- big stores like Macys and stuff like that.
They werent barracks  but the other buildings  cause this was actually the ghetto  it wasnt barracks.
It was a block through con -- it consisted of one  two  three -- three or four -- fours floor high buildings separated by 30 yards  by square yards  and there was a pa thway -- a -- a -- a g -- a -- a way through from one end to the other.
We had a -- an old age home in the building and the people were dying by -- >> Bill Benson: And again  the importance here is that you're forced into a ghetto.
And we went around the place where our house was  which doesnt exist any more  has become apartment buildings.
Then we burned the buildings down because they were just ridden with disease and vermin and insects  everything you can imagine  so we burned them down to get rid of it.
So this 10 buildings assigned to such and such police worker.
But little distance  you know  for the camp f we had f-for buildings.
It was outside  it was in the old ghetto  but outside the little ghetto.
We had to do everything to take out the whole forest to make room for...for that new...new buildings  the foundations and so on.
They had one large ghetto and they had one small ghetto.
It was dirty and had been used as a storeroom  but it hadnt been burned in Kristallnacht because it was a building in a whole row of buildings  undistinguished  and if you had tried to burn it  you would have burned others places down.
Oh  as I said  we started to burn some of the buildings and  uh  the  uh  we backfilled the 14 trenches and the latrines and most of the people were gone.
It had the buildings and the narrow streets and so on.
Those little buildings in a -- in a hole under ground and he used to build these things.
In fact  if you go to Paris  all the bullet holes and people who got killed have plaques all over Paris.
As we walked into the university  which I vaguely remember these huge buildings  but this one special -- specifically  one building  and there was this old hunch-backed gentleman  and he says  \ Can I help you?\
We started building -- put up some buildings  and -- and I became successful with real estate.
I knew  for example  in 1942  Father talked to the Germans and explained to them th at ghetto has no way to heat the buildings and he asked for permission to send Jewish workers in faraway woods to cut the timber and bring it in ghetto  and finally je -- Germans agreed.
All the buildings in Israel are painted white or off-white or  you know  they ar e light colors.
My father's uncle had a factory there  a marble factory for buildings  you know  for stairs  for all kinds of monuments.
I mean  you could be guardin g buildings in a police unit  and under the 37 amended Displaced Persons Act  that would not render you ineligible.
I'm going to go back when I get into the Warsaw ghetto  and I saw there what happened  the Warsaw ghetto had a  they built some walls.
Although the damage in Yokohoma and Nagasaki and Tokyo itself from the fire bombs was beyond belief  too  but you could comprehend that to some extent because the buildings were so fragile  a lot of bamboo and paper structur es.
Judee and I visited Paris about 15 years ago  we did go to -- we did see the town  it was apartment buildings.
And seeing the tall buildings very impressive even though  I mean  from Berlin it's not ex actly a small city  but it doesn't have sky scrappers like New York.
It was outside  it was in the old ghetto  but outside the little ghetto.
And when I returned from there home  I met on the street friend of mine from work -- two men -- and they had -- they selled also from the buildings the  the boards.
Somewhere in the center of the city  of course  there were commercial buildings and also apartment buil dings.
Berlin  there was so much Berlin  and -- and -- and -- and all the other places.
Not the buildings  not the monuments  not the trees  but the attitude of the people.
I worked in the postal service as an economist  making analyses of new equipment  of ne w buildings  economic analyses in that field  and worked until I retired.
They -- each people  you know  release different -- each group because this ja -- this Jewish people was in the barracks  small buildings  you know.
We were waiting there and then they destroyed old buildings at the same time.
We were standing right in th e middle and everything around me  around us  fire from the buildings that they destroyed.
And if you got a couple buildings  they claim the buildings.
They were stopped at the barricades  and then they would get into fire from our buildings  and from behind the barricade.
Later on  after I left  I heard that he was there every day that he actually lived somewheres there in one of the buildings that same Dobberke.
We were living basically  in the area which right right on the Danube where where actually  where the Swedish embassy bought most of those buildings  later on  I mean  we were not there anymore.
It was right in front of the kitchen  the kitchen wa s like in a horseshoe fashion made  it was buildings here  here  and here .
We were we were in hiding  I mean in the ghetto  in the cellar.
The barracks were separate from the men and separate for the women  and I dont remember how many of the barracks were there  but we slept two on one cot  and– And  where these buildings brick?
And on the Carrera there were a few buildings that had no windows  the war had gone   had happened there before th is happened a nd in these few 16 buildings  we were  I would say  20 or 30 people in a small room  so that  and we slept on the floor.
I was given terrible orders and the -- offers  and the buildings been empty for three years and my one -- my middle son went into Wall Street  in the stock market  hes doing fairly well  but hes -- the -- the other day the s -- market was down and everybody called him  ﬁHow come you didnt tell me to sell?ﬂ You know  I mean as if he had known and as if he could c ontrol it.
In the city buildings we went to school  we went to to we had our our excursions  we had a groups of theater groups.
Did he put signs on buildings that said  \ Under the protection of the Swedish Red Cross\ ?
Her father was an architect and actually did all sorts of building both for the some private buildings  but he did a lot of for instance  he was building docks in Fiume at the time  and various I think maybe some public buildings of one kind or another.
And the places that they put people were not these little  tidy brick buildings  but they were these hu-huge barns  for thousands of people.
Because later on the abandoned places  the buildings  the apartments  had to be cleaned and the dead bodies had to be removed because it was very dangerous.
Because we heard the rumors that the Hungarian...uh...Nazis  they are going to even to the protected homes and try to take out people.
We were building the roads and we were demolishing the houses  which they were demolished partially before.
The way the apartment buildings were built at that time was an unfinished basement with dirt floors.
Smith and his staff got the townspeople busy in the conversion of a former Hitler Youth School complex of buildings into an UNRRA DP Center.
And then we drove to Baltimore from New York in my -- what I thought  my unc les enormous  big car and I was really awed by all the cars  by all the buildings.
I remember beggars  you know on the streets coming into the buildings and I remember this was really an awful  there was a man who came into our building to beg and we had stairs in the building which were very much like the kind of metal etched stairs that you have in a lot of schools.
After abou -- After about a week or so  they took us out from the -- they got all the children together  they took us out from the ca -- from the camps  where the German soldiers used to -- used to bring the barracks there  they had like big buildings  at least  I think four or five story buildings.
We do that job and its left 50 or 60 persons  I dont know exactly how many persons  they tell us  now you can live in these buildings.
And there was a banner slung between the two apartment buildings and to me it seemed like it was a barrier that no one would be able to cross anymore  and I was very fearful that my parents would not be able to come back to me.
So  fo r instance  in Budapest  the Swiss had the American and the British interests and to hold their buildings and citizens and protected th em  you see.
There was the front of the Post Office and behind was the interior where they had buildings.
That was not too crowded because these bunks were big enough.
Then  after three weeks  it was a rumor that in the Jewish center of the city  there was a Jewish center  a small streets  with big buildings in a yard  maybe with four buildings  not the rich people  were Jewish peop -- it the Jewish center.
My husband was in the real estate  not the big buildings  of course  but multiple dwellings  that they called it.
But they came and they were not allowed - we were behind -- we had barricades  this was yelling through barricades.
And then  of course  I looked up at those buildings  there was no limit to them.
So at one time they had to bomb the buildings  too.
Because I don't know whether the other remembers in other buildings how it was.
So they we re put into school buildings and even some abandoned factories  as a temporary measure to concentrate them out of sight where we could concentrate -- keep our eyes on them.
And  as they had nationa lized a number of things  number of buildings  number of factories and so on [indecipherable] Yugoslavia after the war.
There was no other buildings in town that I remember  down  away from there  was a very nice Lutheran church.
The number--the house number is still there but the buildings are completely destroyed.
In fact   there was some ghetto  it was not as large a ghetto.
A ghetto is an isolated part of our city situated in what used to be a very poor neighborhood and consisted of several blocks of buildings and small houses.
And uh so I spent uh uh a couple of nights outside of my apartment and uh then uh more and more uh news reached us...and I took cont...tried to contact my other friends and found out that also the uh the uh major administra tive buildings of the Jewish communities had been somehow vandali zed  so that uh there was no...there was no activity.
I mean  there was also other buildings  you know  other than ours.
She just found out that he was picked up and was sent up to the mountain with many other men in a covered truck to clean some buildings.
So they took us out from these barracks  these little tiny barracks  and they put us in the unfinished buildings.
And -- and then in his early 1941 my grandfather who was in the -- he owned real estate  office buildings and apartment houses.
their ka they kept coming  and so my mother would would receive those then  and put them in the different places where they had they not all of them could live in those buildings  and so there were also tents  that the British had given us.
In every town  there was a big ghetto  and later made it a small ghetto.
Well  i -- i -- i -- okay  my grandfathers property  a-as I recall involved  I believe  three buildings or four buildings .
Uh slightly rolling hills  low hills and uh dotted with uh these bungalows and different buildings there.
So we went in  and we went through a secret underground passage through one of the buildings  and we met som e Polish Jewish underground members  who brought us some dirty clothes  because we would be recognized right away in our outfits from Interview with Julian Kulski September 25   2014 66 the outside  so we put the rags on.
In the morning you could see the glow  you coul d s buildings woul d shake around us.
And as people would walk out of the buildings  if they didnt walk straight  if their child was crying  the Germans were in a total fr enzy  and there were Latvians who were assisting.
Can you tell me what the conditions were in the ghetto?
So after the war  this cousin by accident met...uh...a girl from Antwerp a nd...uh...uh...he himself was the son of a very extremely rich man who had buildings and...a nd...uh...uh...petroleum pit.... I don't know how you call that...uh...so he sold someth ing and...uh...because he...he couldn't take the money so he bought some gold and put it in hi s shoe and because he didn't want to go directly to Antwerp  he came through France and was looking a way to go through the...uh...frontier.
Was street you couldnt even move  all the buildings  the rubble was [inaudible] They say that at the end Berlin was a the fight in the city was a fight  about two  three weeks.
To me  any building was Š it was very powerful looki ng  as opposed to the other buildings and we would bring Š my mother and I would bring  we Š we would bring packages there.
There was still a lot of USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0047 71 bullet -- you know  bomb sh-shrapnel things in the buildings.
I just...I must confess I don't remember at what point I found out that it was France  and then under SS guard made to march through this small town which is an ancient town of uh you know...it looks medieval and old buildings and cobblestones.
2/13/95 ALFRED SUNDQUIST Page 6 driver with a jeep and uh so we approached the camp in the jeep and the camp was uh had uh barracks buildings that looked like an ordinary army camp.
People were living in the street i-in the buildings  but they were all pockmarked with shells  old shells.
As long as the British air force came  cer tainly I mean they had tried what they do  but they are...the the damage they were they were inflicting on on on the on the buildings in Berlin were rather minor  though they were there I m ean and it was...you never knew where they would hit and what would be hit  and we were part of that  but when the American bombers came  I mean there was...there for the first time I realized that was a massive attack and you'll see when we when we uh looked around that Berlin was really burning  and we had to hope that the railway uh uh would be destroyed  but that didn't happen.
Do you remember some of the conditions of life in the camp that you remember especially  that were especially difficult?
And you could see bombed out buildings  and you could see in to homes  that people didn't go down to the basement and they were de ad  you know.
That it was a red brick building and was built with a courtyard insi de but I think a lot of buildings in Europe were.
Ghetto consisted of two sections  the main Ghetto and Small Ghetto.
Had the Germans assigned you to that task of cleaning up the buildings?
As things began to be very difficult  there was in these old buildings  they had  since there was no refrigeration  they had like a closet  a very thick closet where they would keep the goods.
They would sleep anywhere in the buildings  or wherever they could  you know  summer was warm at the time  cause we got there in May  and then we got summer  but then in wintertime it got Interview with Norman Coulson October 4  2013 62cold  and but bo most of the people were gone a after I left I mean  they were gone before I left  really.
Not everything was concrete and glass  and well  even today the town has preserved a few buildings.
So  you know  in the city in Berlin there's only  like  big buildings  cement floors.
We lived in a residential area in one of these big apartment buildings.
Ther e was plenty of space but on the right side of those courts were sort of buildings two  three-story buildings; very primitive but buildings.
That dust tore buildings apart into pieces the size of this cup.
The only buildings the Americans left intact in Frankfort because they thought theyll need it for their military government later  so it was.
The 62 Germans came in while they were asleep in there  and–and one of the - where they kept horses or cows or whatever - one of those buildings  they put it afire and everybody got killed.
The room  the halls  the buildings  and these were all pretty modern barrack buildings  reeked of the odor of urine  you could see where people had defecated behind stairwells.
In the beginning we were keeping some -- they had some -- some -- two big buildings built oof brick  and thats -- was meant originally as ba rracks for the -- th-the gu ards.
Anyway  which is not far from Feldifing  which is a series of small buildings with rooms and bathrooms and whatnot  which the -- the Germans had used for  I think army people and the -- there were Polish officers  or members -- Poles  who had somehow taken control of that and were living there.
And then we were working on some cement place  making blocks for the buildings that were being destroyed.
He managed to renovate one of the buildings which was really run down and the city was interested to keep the outside-- The same?
They had just I dont know whether it was straw board  or what  but it wasnt it it was looked like temporary buildings.
These Jewish houses   as you showed in one of the pictures  had a big yellow star.
The beautiful buildings that were left  the beautiful cathedrals that you saw.
We were in a horrible  frightening condition needless to say  because we heard that the Hungarian Nazis are coming to the buildings and getting off people from the buildings for a different marches to take them away wherever they wanted to take to deport them.
Second one  you know  the camp was already built and the buildings was already built so  you know  we don't make any cement.
Yeah  totally  you know  its all [indecipherable] buildings that 50 or 60 years later  you know. [
There were two buildings together that people were running to these buildings.
Wa -- can you tell me  do you know the particular buildings and the particular streets that were attached?
We were walked there  and they pushed in anywhere they could...the Hungarian Nazis.
But my our building was not da maged  and and the buildings across the street were not damage d. And we pulled our Jeep up  and it when places have been shelled  that kind of a funny silenc e  theres no birds singing  or things like that  and it was spring it was late spring  the beginning of summer  I think.
Of course  the next morning when it all cleared up  we saw the tall buildings of New York  the Statue of Liberty.
And I can remember we would be running to the shelter on one side  and buildings falling on the other side with bombs.
