All of a sudden -- we used to hear the artillery from far away.
Because  you know  there was shooting everywhere in Budapest in that time.
But  soon after that  when the war we were liberated by the Russians.
They  they  they made a ring around us  and they were shooting and somehow someway we run through this one guy helped us with a boat  from our people other side and no one was killed.
And then  they shot several people  put some houses on fire.
57 Carry it and the number one  it was responsible by shooting it.
In fact  I have some pictures of them shoo shooting them.
Many of those  of the people said uh  uh  they had enough  and they ran out of the  of our group  and the SS guards uh accompanying us  th en were shooting these people to death  uh  which they liked to do because  I understand  they were  got a certain compensation for that--so and so many days uh  of vacation  and the next a bonus or something like that.
They went with their list  apparently they had a list of of addresses  would take them out and then just not it it wa shooting was not th-the the great part  but but to torture  all kind of ways of torturing  you know  like chopping off a arm  a-and especially also with children.
In -- in the ghetto was terrible  you know  because first of all was not [indecipherable] on the German  you know  shooting to the -- to the people  like to the -- to the animals  you know  they dont -- some -- somebody was th -- they shoot him  additional.
And we used to come home from the night shift and the barrack was closed and they used to pick out people from the barrack and we saw them and they were shooting them in the woods for no reason at all.
I don't know if the Russians...I don' t know if the Russians were shooting at us  or the Germans or the Polish--or the Czech were shooting us  or the Germans were shooting us.
Who knows what the truth is but it was a point where the Russians were just shooting people on the street  do anything they wanted to for 30 days.
I felt that time I couldn't stand the cold weather  the beating on the way  the shooting of those who could not walk any longer.
And when the Phony War took place  ther e was 8 months of no war and no peace  but when there was no shooting.
They would say  \ Oh yes  we heard firing there last night  there was shooting going on \  \ Where was it?\  \
She just had an operation in Poland and they were shooting.
I always thought she ended up maybe in Auschwitz or Treblinka or somewheres  but after I saw ﬁSchindlers Listﬂ I saw they were shooting like crazy.
The SS was still there and when they see us or saw us running  they were still shooting after us  but lu ckily uh our name tag was not on their on their on their bullet  and then all of a sudden uh we reached an area...meanti me it had become dark  where we were we were somehow in no man's land  but not completely because on that road we had to reach  there we saw the the remnants of the German army  also tryi ng to make their way to the north  and refugees obviously coming from Berlin with all kinds of vehicles  fire trucks   hearses  milk trucks...whatever moved  they had used  and sometimes put togeth er because they didn't have enough gasoline anymore  so they had tied...had tied these together  and we then said well  probably the safest is to mix with these people  and after al l  I had thrown away the the the the stripped coat and I took...had thrown...not thrown away but put it my pocket the the cap  so I I looked at least like a civilian  and my friends also whatever they had.
During the night we saw artillery from far away shooting in our direction.
And 20 -- pe -- probably two  three days after the Soviet invade in Poland  we was ma -- surrounded by army -- Soviet army tanks  and after small shooting  we supposed to surrender.
They take pistol out and shooting people came to work like dogs.
Uh so we got out of the living room and we spent the day in the cellar  and we heard all the shooting.
And  that sort of got neglected when the Russians came in.
I laid still and Interview with Grant Shultheis October 8  2010 19 he sh quit shooting at me.
I lived in a small courtyard and there's shooting going on  and one after the other is getting stronger.
And each time they came in  they shoot...they were shooting people like mad.
They even arrested the 14-year -old boy because  after all  he was also guilty of the shooting in Paris  of the German Embassy employee.
By four oclock was a shooting and they took almost four kilometers to the st ation.
And this came closer and closer and we had SS in our house and they were duck in th e garden and what the bombs didnt destroy  they destroyed with their shooting.
Never forget that date...it was 19...still 1941  and we came to a place in this town and the Germans were all around us and they started shooting and we were hiding in a field of uh...what do you call it... what the plant is called...they are tall stocks like....yeah...and we were heading there  hiding there  and there were uh people fell.
We were there one night  and they were shooting all night in the area.
After after that  that young SS man was crazy  the going around and shooting people; he had so much energy.
Then they made them go into the woods  dig their graves  and then they shot them.
This is the end of my line.ﬂ Sure enough  a few minutes la ter  they started shooting everyone that-- (End of Side A  Tape 2) Tape II  Side B We walked seven kilometers to the North Sea.
And and tha then I remember heari ng booming and shooting and then the train stopped.
But they were very close to us and they were shooting during the night.
What happened  a -- a drunk sergeant  he was drunk  he gathered all these boys together  drove to -- into a corner and began shooting  and he hit only this guy  fortunately.
We were there for a few hours  we heard shooting  then we came out and the Germans were here.
The Russians were closer or they were coming ; the bombardment.
They had some shotting [shooting] and the whole town was surrounded.
The flames that were shooting toward the sky when we were told that all the people who went to the left side were selected by Mengele.
But I had quite a few times I even had an airplane shooting at me.
Then  at end of February--we were there from October [1944] 'til end of February [1945]--duri ng the night we start to hear all kind of noises; airplane and shooting.
And so they were  they were  they saw one at night  they were shooting sometimes for no reason.
And the the German machine  automatic machines shoo was shooting and one of the bullets hit the guy which was next window to me  hit in the face a nd took off the half of the head  and he was dead at this spot  and I thought that I got also a bullet  but not the face  only that the head and seeing him  I thought that my head is off.
My husband went out shooting something  so tomorrow the doctor will be home.
And they were shooting [indecipherable] away  so everybody jumped up and down  you know  every time they came over a plane Yeah.
Then somehow the Germans started blowing whistles and they all barged out and started shooting at each other and we backed out through the woods.
She arranged -- they arranged the little chapel in the basement and we used to pray 24 hours  you know  novena for the safe [indecipherable] from Warsaw because we were under shells  and i-it was horrible  horrible time  and the bombs  you know  Germany used to bombs  and American used to bombs  and everybody  you know  and we were there  you know  in the middle of this shooting.
Bu t see  with all the bombardments and with all the shooting  she went wild.
And uh I don't know if they were shooting  and she was hurt and one of the SS men then turned and killed fourteen girls on that truck.
Soon enough  we heard the sound of shooting and saw emerging groups of prisoners running for their lives back to the train.
Dont forget  a a division had like 12 000 men  and we were shooting all over the place.
And we walked he took me back to the front lines  because he felt I would be safer in the company  as a as a soldier  than being caught as a insurgent with a gun  and wounded  because they were shooting all the wounded prisoners.
So when we started shooting  when we started firing  all of a sudden  hands went up to the top.
So  we could see his bullets going going down  you know  and when they were when he was shooting at at all the rest   you know  as hes coming down the line.
They found the rock  they opened the rock and urged us to come out  but nobody would move  so they started shooting into the bunker and throwing some gas ro ckets  whatever it was.
Did you know after that that they were shooting at Ninth Fort?
We were sitting in the cellar and uh the Russian tanks came in and there were a lot of shooting  a lot of killing.
There was shooting  there were planes  uh there was some explosions.
I start screaming with my people  they rest  \ Stop and start shooting back.
They were shooting on cows and people in the same way.
The Germans have probably 28 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD owned up to what they did better than any other country in Europe  and hate gets you nowhere.
It was really hard to stay alive and dodging bullets  although did some stupid things like watching people shooting at me  Russians  or Russian airplanes strafing me.
Everybody started pushing forward with their papers in hand and the Germans  the...additional German officials came out and was shooting in the air and beating and pushing people back  and it it happened that the man in charge of that office was a a man of German origin who lived in our town before the war and was a teacher  a high school teacher  my brother's high school teacher.
And we arrived in the camp  in the main camp  we were quarantined in Block 11  and as you know  between Block 11 and 10 there was the Death uh place  and uh  it was  we couldn't see anything  we heard only shooting.
Anyway  we heard scream and we hear shooting and  of course  there was a little window to look out and we keep going to the ditch to the window.
We had to hi when he was shooting  we had to hide in a doorway of a of an apartment building.
For 48 hours  they allowed the Germans to get their hatred out so the Russians  all their misery  for 48 hours  had a shooting game with the Jews  they walked around in ghetto and killed anybody in sight  anybody  they can be  they can get their anger out because they lost Stalingrad  and the front start moving clos er and closer to us  they dug up that time the all the people that they killed Nine Fort  and burned them  you could see the fires  the flames  because it wasn't far from the ghetto  and uh  they decide to liquidate the ghetto.
>> Bill Benson: Erika  one of the things I know you've told me about is when the Germans first came  they gathered everybody in a field and started shooting everybody  and you were able  you and your father were able to  and your family were able to survive that.
So there was this one night that I remember where I was crouching in a corner  sitting on a sofa in the corner  and my uncle and aunt were in the bedroom  and I was crying because of all the shooting.
We almost di dn't make it because of the shooting and the bombing.
What we had to do is wore a yellow arm band  and we were taken out to the shooting ranges and had to pick up the l eads from the bullets that they were firing.
They had fire boats shooting off the water  and they had people with jazz bands playing and whatever  whistles blowing.
So  after a few days being in the ŠŠ in the pyramidal tent  and sometimes fellows were drunk going past and shooting like wild  I said  \ Eh  I am going to go dig myself a slit trench.\
And I told him to -- I order him  I didnt ask him -- ask him  I told him  remove one tile edge end of the roof so I can see the road  and use the opening for shooting at the Germans.
So when we start running  Frenzel was already shooting and he had something in front of him.
And from the other side  the German soldiers were shooting them in the graves and right away  the tanks were running over them.
And...uh...see the ones who looked sick or old or whatever it is  they were shooting.
Yeah  a a lot of [indecipherable] Do you remember the shooting th Miss Westerly was talking about?
And when they were already really close and were shooting and so on  the last time  be fore he s before he actually remained with us  I went to meet him and he always talked about that.
All through the night...we shouldn't run away there...the LIthuanians were shooting in the sky with...with guns.
It was quiet already  just  you know  once in a while we heard a shot someplace.
She said  'But I know they are shooting over their heads because they are just trying to make us believe that they are killing them but they are just scaring us.
And we got up  and we went outside  and over our head was a battle between planes  and shooting.
TAPE 2  SIDE 1 Around 10 oclock  at first we were in the barracks  then we started to move out to go out from the barracks  after that incident at the gate  the push back was like I said before and so we start to spread and we were in the barracks  we were outside  because we heard the shooting and wondered what was going on.
So we been lay there for 3 days  4 days  we knew the war is coming to an end because we heard the cannons shooting and a lot of activity at night and during the day  and it came closer and closer.
Well  because -- we were told because the Russians were coming.
So when they took him out and they start shooting people in this...this little market  he pulled his gun out and wanted to shoot this German guy but unfortunate  his gun was so old  rusty  that it didn't fire.
And come back to the moment  the guy -- German from the top start shooting this way.
Q2: There was the decree prohibiting shooting of these animals  remember?
We couldn't be in the in the front or later maybe two or three hours later  they start shooting  the Germans  the others start shooting in the fo rest.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 18 Suddenly the Germans moved in.
They were shooting at anybody who didnt rush  who didnt go as fast as he was told  who didnt walk straight  had one more bundle than  than it was absolutely allowed.
I knew I must lie in the way when they are shooting.
Under the rotten straw and with children and uh old people and the complete uh uh the complete helplessness and the complete lack of uh of...we didn't know what's going to happen...to happen to us but we knew  of course  we are now in the clutches of the German and at night we heard sometimes shooting from other parts of the camp.
And then when we reached Vileshka we 11 were...in which we were for a very short time  uh we were just also kind of like working in the ground and sleeping and uh and we were now emersed in a large mass of prisoners uh with the German SS men who were over us walking through the camp  you know  shooting people at random and and uh there was  we were just part of the mass.
But then after a while it uh  the truth came through that they uh killed them there  and they bur ied them in mass graves.
01:32:00 They're going to shoot me  because they were shooting  but I didn't care if I'm going to die  because that time you don't care.
You know  a lot of Germans  they say they didn't know what was going on.
Also  there was a hierarchy which naturally some people didn't understand  but I had no argument with that because I realized a pe rson who came here fifty years ago when there was nothing here except rocks and Arabs shooting at them  has  is more equal  right  than somebody who arrives here today.
And we heard shooting for about four days because this lumber yard was situated also on the market place.
The German guards were shooting out of -- no  th these were Ukrainians  probably.
And I think this is when they took them to the Ninth Fort.
And so you recall walking to the transport to Auschwitz  and the dogs and the guards shooting people who were straggling I guess.
Everybody they didn't believe me  but later on they had the proof because someone told them the same story that there was reckless shooting of innocent people  you know  just like this particular one.
And when Julian heard that he put both hands on my ears so I wouldnt hear it  but I heard it.
And there  he found out about it  and he went to Russians and he said that these people were shooting Jews and there was a big trial and he was a witness and these people were sent to Siberia.
If you traveled from one place to another  people were crowding onto planes  I saw  I saw  this is something that just came back to me  I remember GI MP's shooting into the air to keep people from getting onto the GI car because the other cars were so crowded where people were going from Frankf urt to Berlin  from Be rlin to Nuremberg to find  to Munich to find their relatives.
And the guards  the SS guards came in and shot him.
It started as a gymnastics  as a field trips and it turned into throwing stones and then throwing grenades and then a little rifle -- target  and little MG 34s  shooting and stuff.
And uh  they sent a Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
He didnt want to come into Auschwitz and they were standing there and shooting.
They Interview with Edith Palkowitz August 26  2016 11 were shooting without aiming.
And here we were  walking on the streets where they were shooting  and the little girl was so frightened and I said  \ Well  what did Raoul do?
They saw that we fall practically down but we'll leave you out right before Laurenburg and everybody was walking and the shooting was going on  and they drove us up to Laurenburg  and the first house we walked in.
Was everything used up  they kept on shooting into the mass grave.
They were surrounding us and we heard them talking and shooting.
And this same commander for the camp was shooting people like flies.
And I remember from 1939 I had these flare flare gun.
They were shooting at the Germans across the mountains  and you could see it.
Pretty soon I hear the shots and true to their word they were shooting all the people who had tried to hide money on their person.
Now  the hate against Bucovina Jews was so much because they thought and they said that the Jews were shooting at the Rumanian Army at the time when they had to retreat.
So  then immediately  the 1st thing that happened  there was shooting  you'd hear  we didn't  the first thing that happene d is that no one walked out  we didn't leave our apartment.
The Germans occupied this  this the  the hill  and they were coming at us with bullets.
By about three o'clock in th e afternoon I hear lots of shooting out in the mountains  which is in the direction which I knew very well which we...because we hiked there.
Did you take any part in the shooting  or the blowing up of the crematorium at all?
Nobody was shooting at those planes; although there were thousands of SS in  at that time  in Dachau.
Now maybe the Germ ans had only one flare gun  or maybe the guy who's shooting the flare gun was very sl ow  but the the uh you know there were intervals  enough intervals between the uh flare guns that I could always...when I hear a pop I hit the ground and waited  and of course they were raking with machine gun fire with tracers over the field.
At that time they were shooting the people who came for water.
And I remember -- Ill tell you the truth  I remember shooting  and I think shooting and shooting and shooting a lot.
Not the interview but rather talking about photos that we'll be shooting.
They didn't want to end up shooting at each other so there was a hiatus.
02: 37:10 Shoot people  innocent people running and just shooting at them.
That was we we did we did that  we did shooting  you know.
And in fact  we could begin to see  at the distance  the trucks coming up  and armored vehicles  you know  because they didnt have tanks  or anything like that.
So we saw the German pointing at us  and he he starts shooting.
Girls also had auxiliary girls training  but I dont think they were shooting.
All I could hear was the Germans calling and shooting  and at that point... Calling and shooting?
He was crying  and I held him near me all throughout the uh shooting.
A few minutes later we could hear 01:54: some more shooting and before you know it  the were Russian tanks  Russian tanks moved into camp.
But the so-called [indecipherable] But there were the Jews that were hanging  yeah.
They were shooting to the  to  at the mountains  but to us they were goo d. They didn't do anything to us.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 23 The Germans were shooting.
But after that I tried 13 times to cross  and the second time they let me go in a big field and they were shooting  you know  tracers all over.
Then I heard that maybe an hour later I heard a machine gun was shooting and this is where they killed the whole group  and my mother was there too.
Now then the other SS  they started to...to... uh...argue among them who is going to do the shooting for me.
Some refugees [indecipherable] they run away from the Germans  and some of them they run away from the Russian.
When we heard the shooting  everybody like fell to the ground.
Evidently there had just been a round-up or some shooting or... anyway  I sa w the Wacht mann in the ghetto gate from a long way away.
Well  a-at that time England was having a tough time because they were being bombarded and the -- Germany had just developed the -- the -- the V1 rocket and they were shooting these rockets over and I remember that very well.
Then when he was shot and they were also shooting other people from there.
And and I decided  well  the only way Im going to make it is put on the Hitler youth uniform  and hoping that I wouldnt be forced to take a rifle and start shooting.
So my -- my parents were -- absolutely you hear the shooting  and my parents were obvi ously very frightened.
We -- there were shots fired at us  but maybe by one or two guys in the group.
So we stayed in the cellar during the onslaught and we heard the shooting.
The SS was shooting uh mostly into the air luckily  but the people  these Cz echoslovakians  they didn't budge.
And they were running around in these attics and shooting and then the Russians went in and said if you dont get them down then you all have to go out.
I mean the Gentiles came back and they told us that they were shooting there.
But I was going down there and down there because a-another plane come right behind him  and the guys start shooting at him.
We were on this on the middle of the road and the Ukrainian shot started shooting and people were killed and I remember one of the men.
And then they marched in there and after awhile  we started hearing gunfire  you know  and we realized what was going on  they were shooting them.
Another thing that happened was I was sitting in the balcony of my -- our apartment  and I saw a German chasing a young man who obviously was a -- a man of the resistance and he was shooting at him.
And then we had also shooting with -- with -- what you call those little pipes?
They couldn't 6 remove it  they left it there and he was very handicapped from that shooting.
The -- we started hearing -- if you envision like this room is round and down there is a forest  and we heard shooting at night in the forest.
After the shooting st-- subsided  I got out 33 of the cemetery  hid somewhere  because there was always a curfew.
And during these 19 years  not my years  but 19 years there was not a week or something without any shouting -- any shooting.
So we did see some German soldiers  motorcycles and they were ep -- talking to us in German  just complaining about the weather  the shooting and we answered in German like we one of them.
I was thinking where they shot me and they were...and I was wounded.
Because for him  disobeying an order for not shooting  he would have been killed.
I only know that there was a heavy shooting  bombing  all this December what I heard...if this was the beginning of December because I don't recall.
Well  when the shooting stopped and when -- when Soviet Army had occupied -- reoccupied  Misha came in {Crying} to see my parents and the Glotters and the other people  and introduced himself as Moshe Wiseman  a Jewish colonel from Moscow  who -- who was a partisan.
And they were shotti shooting after us  you know  when we they saw that we were  you know  Jews  I guess.
The last column was called and many people fall on a...they they want to be sick  you know...they don't want to go  and they start shooting  you know.
And there came also transports from Poland  and when there came transports from Poland  was we were locked up in our area and there was always shooting.
We had rumors thatartillary shooting from far distance and we thoughtwe always hoped that it will come closer  because the Russians made a big move insomewhere in January  and they stopped in March not far from us  about 200 kilometer.
And  of course  as soon as we arrived there  we also experienced the bombing and machine gunning of the German airplanes.
Everybody hears we have been going to the shoot -- to the tar -- the target  know how you call the pla ce when you shooting the -- you know  and we was training  but everybody -- everybody has to have a [indecipherable] signed from the shooting  you know  the [ind ecipherable] sign has to shooting for hundred possible [indecipherable] 99.
They were shooting at each other  we were in the middle and the German planes would come down with reflector s at night and shoot with machine guns at the people on the ground.
It was a tabulator  it was a sorter  it was an input machine  the whole thing  whole shooting thing.
They say they couldn't leave town because there was  there were rumors that they are shooting.
We 22 knew where they were shooting on the right  and on the left.
Constantly the...the artillery fire was going back  and they were shooting around the...the hay where  you know  where they had the barn.
And at the evening  crossed at the evening [indecipherable] the shooting machine guns  artillery where there was a river  Wisok river  where our units went.
Interview with Felix Nicinski March 6  2007 76 Yes  if you -- if you hear shooting  you know  fights  stuff like that  that brings memory back  sure.
But they were still keeping order by shooting somebody  so there were injured people  they couldn't walk.
But we had not heard anything  23 shooting or gassing or anything  they were just gone  you see. [
But to understand this  that the shooting and the killing there and my family was already dead.
And they took the rifles off and started shooting at us  and we run up the embankment  and near the ghetto walls  and by the ghetto walls we got to downtown.
But in the same time  when they took them  someth ing was with the partisans  a shooting and a lot in the middle of the road.
During this march they were shouting a nd shooting at Jews and we would just step over corpses like it was nothing.
When people try to run to the window  they were shooting them.
Got up  and they came Russians too said the Germans run away.
You  just for pleasure coul d go out on the balcony  and see some Jews walking by there  and just shoot them  becau se they just feel like shooting somebody.
Then when it was very bad and the Germans were really retreating and ther e was lots of being in the basement  shooting  and the Russians came in from the other side  she had to go to to run away  and she said the only thing  stay in my apartm ent but be sure that you take care of the bust of Adolph Hitler.
We're getting close to the end ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 13 of any departure from Germany.
Ukrainian guards and other guards are shooting after us but didn't hit us  and  after running for two  three kilometers we found a Polish peasant who was going home in a wagon  horse-driven wagon.
When the polish transports came  was a  they  a lot of Polish they didn't want to go to th e gas chamber  and that was many times that they shot them  and there was shooting and screaming before  before we  uh  did anything  the assorting the clothes.
Yeah  and then when we finally waded there  when the German troops arrived from the marina  from the naval units  they started shooting at random.
In any case  we were ten women in a  in a house after the liberation when they starting shooting everybody.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 3 account of the Holocaust.
And it was bedlam over there - screaming and killing and shooting and tearing the place apart.
And my mother and I pleaded with my sister not to go because the soldiers were standing outside and shooting  just shooting just for the fun  just for the fun of it; no t because they had to  just for the fun.
After the war  a year later I was just shooting in my studio  and a detective came with somebody.
Some things stand in my mind; like I remember there was a scene of fire shooting out of the skeleton  what was left.
An d then when the Russians were surrounding the city  they were shooting artillery into the city and all that.
There was no more the screaming and shooting and dogs barking and so forth.
In the last year I was there  this is 1937  we had rifle shooting one day  we did it in our  we did the gymnasium.
And he was only a young fella too  because when he come down and passed there at one tim e  I saw him sitting in there with both thumbs on the on the triggers  when he was shooting at me.
I really don't remember even realizing that I was liberated until the war was over because everybody started shooting into the air  and it came  sort of   on my birthday.
The Rumanians were rounding up the people  the Germans were doing the killing  the shooting.
Most of the shooting  the killing was done by the Gentiles  by the Lithuanians themselves  because they could confiscate everything you owned took away your property  took away your apartments  whatever you owned.
So then Im carrying  all of a sudden the Americans fly over there and start shooting wi -- machine gun fire.
I wasnt there maybe one hour or two  I heard shooting.
And you have no imagination what does it mean when -- when the shooting is of the bullets is whizzling  yes  above your hand -- head  and you can -- you hear the shots  and -- and bullet sounds  and you can see the potatoes cut.
So for about a year I was in England doing these things on the land with buzz bombs  shooting down buzz bombs  or on the sea trying to find aircraft and and pilots in their lifeboats with my radar.
They stopped the streetcar  and he and his second in command started running off  and the SS men were running behind him Interview with Julian Kulski September 25   2014 85 and shooting machine guns.
Do you remember do you remember where you were then the war Eight eight of May  wa s finished  no shooting.
Dogs barking and jumping  SS men shouting and shooting  and one SS man standing in the middle  he looked to me like a very high officer.
Now  that was a terrifying time  because they were shooting anybody who  let's say  approached a wagon  or run to a place that they didn't want to  or whatever.
And there was some shooting going on  and they got about  I thi nk 4 people  to dig to-graves  just outside of wire  the fence of the camp  and they brought these uh people that tried to escape that were uh shot already  but they were not dead  and they made the other Jews bury these people that were not really dead yet  and they were begging not to be buried  that they're still alive  that they should do something to kill them.
It was shooting innocent people [indecipherable] some body brought out to uncover their name  and -- and they were just shooting around the city  yeah.
it -- it didnt lighten it  but it gave one -- its almost like giving you -- giving you time to breathe before you were fully in it  bef -- let me tell you something which -- which may be irrelevant  but I once watched a shooting from my window on 77nd Street.
Some  interesting enough  especially of Po lish people  non-Jews (cough) who knew that eventually or who hoped that the population around Au schwitz would help them  tried to escape into the woods  which during the night was was was daring but still most of them were successful because all all the shooting didn't help because most of the bullets hit the trees and not the people who had who had escaped  but for us there was there was no choice.
And then one Jew was somehow -- wasn t obedient  and they shot him.
They didn't le t us go  just stay and shooting them.
There was a lot of shooting  a lot of bombing from airplanes and everything.
They were shooting at us  but there were mostly shooting at the other guys.
They didnt think  it wouldnt make a difference with them as far as shooting somebody.
You can -- when -- when you couldnt help it [indecipherable] the shooting was going on and yo u hit people  you didnt even know youre hitting them  but when youre right in front of them  you have them in front of you  and say you [indecipherable] you say something or I shoot  I couldnt do that.
And Im sure Id have to go dig it out or I dont even know if I have a copy of it  you know  it would be fairly thorough about where they would be interviewing any witnesses who were there and whether they  the police officials in fact were threatened or there was any reason that would justify their having used force in shooting those students who were killed.
So they started shooting  they didn't there was corn  high corn  they didnt see the ditch.
You could see when we went to the barrack  the flames shooting and the block leader told us what it is  that the people from the selections are having appointment w ith their forefathers.
You were -- you were actually fighting at some point  at the end of the war?
I equate it with the situation in Ethiopia when Mussolini went into Ethiopia with tanks and they were shooting uh slingshots against the tanks.
And fellow who -- German giz -- who or -- was on the tower  and has a reflector  saw something happened and put the reflector there  and start shooting  becau se somebody go to the body where was not checked yet.
He he be he was a a machine gunner  and he got smacked in the head once with a bullet exploded th-th that the pilot was shooting at him when he was going on a mission.
And of course the the captain  or whoever he was  was there  noticed that immediately  you know  he said there  look  you know  there  you know  somebody may be shooting us.
When I wasn't being shot at I was shooting with movie film and with  uh  black and white.
Interview with Mira Zimmerman January 23  2015 16 Oh  so you were in Grodno   and you were and there was shooting going on in town?
And we had daily street fights  mob scenes  shooting  flag burning.
And as the rule was  that as soon as it got light outside the shooting would stop.
That murderer Kapo  he was asked...he says  \ Now your turn.ﬂ By the way  the shooting happened many times after that.
So anyway  so then we started hearing the shooting outside the Dippoldiswalde   and we decided to get out.
I said  \ Well  is there any combat or shooting of any kind?\
I remember I saw the dead bodies and myand they were shooting in the hospital.
Plenty times the Germans came with planes and they were shooting us down.
So  because we tried  because we thought we are better off because I think the Ital ian were  there were only a few Italian in Chaplina  but in Chaplina they were shooting all the time to the mountains  I guess 12 there were the partisans in the mountains.
You know  there were whispers  terrible whispers  about places like that  about shooting people.
They were even shooting at people who kept on throwing down a cup to catch some snow because everyone was dehydrated.
And when we heard the stories that they did not let the people survive  the last day they were shooting them  I dont think they would -- if they have time w ould have not be willing to do it to Terezin  too.
But there were continuous shooting apparently going on in fort number nine.
He did the kosher killing with ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 9 the prescribed knife  then he took a gun and shot him to the head so that the neighbors would think he was shooting the animal.
And artillery was shooting and hitting in in transit was hitting a top of a trees and branches were falling down.
We didn't know anything  uh  but then uh  when we were walking uh  uh to work  uh  a fellow um  a friend of mine who had been on th e  on the same block with my friend  Fritz Schaeffer  said  \ You know  did you hear the uh shooting this morning?\
He they were told by some local people that there was  at one point in 1940  in the spring of 19 40  some shooting and but they couldnt really see it  because this was on the place where the NKVD had the private houses  they had some  you know  from what I unde rstand  near and and the prisoners who were in ca Katyn   were the prisoners from the [indecipherable] camp my father was in  which was near in the Byelorussia  near Smolensk.
There might have been other reasons for the shooting  but this was the official version.
You know  they were on the roofs - the Germans on the roofs.
And next day the Lithuanians told us was shooting all night  all night was shooting.
And I say well  th ey are shooting so that means that that's good news  because you know  if they're shootin g there that means that there are some friends out there.
So he was the director  or Thats right  he became the director of that  and so what happens  they started in bringing in Jews in there  and they came out and shooting.
I I we didnt see the actual shooting because it was inside the fort.
Start shooting back because otherwise nobody will live.ﬂ And I remember like today this one of them guys  it was Andrejew.
and they start shooting  they start shooting from all sides  and Chaim took my hand  and all the people were already there  Chaim took my hand  and there was a little house  and then we saw Frenzel had a pill or something in front of him  and start also shooting  so everybody stopped at the little house because that house was there  and then we had to go farther.
And when they were shooting those guns  they were dead shots  too.
The Germans came in town  and they start pounding these doors  you know  shooting.
The screaming and shouting and shooting stopped  and so we got up  waited until another hour or so.
Very often the guards  in order to keep themselves awake  were shooting.
They stopped shooting in the morning and about 11 000 people were still alive.
While being in..in Ascunion  I remember a time of revolution which happened every now and then and there was wild shooting.
That was the first thing what I saw that they  we didn't see it  but we heard the shooting.
So we went there towards that village  and we ducked out when the...when they started shooting  and then we come  we came to the middle of the city  of the  of that village.
The Germans  there were very  very many German people  they ran away too.
And we walked out with the front and shooting at them.
Yah  there were Ukrainians and SS men who were shooting and killing us.
And sometimes we heard airplanes and shooting  lot of shooting  and there were some direct hits.
So  all of a sudden the Germans  you know  there was a shot -- we had a shot.
Uh  I remember once there came a whole transport from Belgitz  and they made an uprising  and  uh  and I remember that uh  when we had to assort the clothes  everything was filled with blood  and they locked us up  and we thought now we will die of course too because they locked us up and we were  were not allowed to to go out of our barrack where we slept  and uh  the  the  we have shooting and screaming  and it was unbelievable  and later we had to sort the clothes  it was full with blood  and  and uh then also in the one of the pants  my husband found in Yiddish written  \ Take revenge \  the comment  in Jewish  \ Take revenge.\
And I remember a policeman took a rifle  and he start shooting to the plane  a plane  a German plane.
I picked up the child and they were shooting on the street.
The men in the comm ander decided to run away and tell everybody to run after them and they cut them and they shot them  they were shooting at them and they were pulling them in.
One guy was outside chasing out and the rest of them were shooting  one by one  in every house in front of them.
So  I dont know that we experienced starvation when we got back  because it took awhile - you know  that was basically the German  the concept of eliminating the Jews by any way you coul d  so its by starvation  or by shooting or whichever.
If they were ignorant  they were ignorant and they would not have the sensitivity to -- to even understand -- yo -- its just talking to -- to -- to a -- somebody totally out of this world  they would say  ﬁWhat would you do if somebody was shooting at you?ﬂ Well  of course the answer is youd most probably shoot them back  even if it was the Sabbath.
But  again  it was -- S usi's correct  that there was this policy of mass shooting first.
Therefore  in case there's a shooting and we have to run or split  you know  at least for that they'll give you a piece of bread  some butter  or some milk.
So we sat and talked to Anne and \ Uncle Sam\  and everybody and said goodbye for the time being  and we went with him to Amsterdam  and there was shooting on the Dam and we were there at the dam when the shooting occurred  and we just could hid in a store--called at that time Peek & Kloppenberg [a Dutch department store] on the co rner of Dam next to the palace.
There was one night  I wont forget  where the house across the street was a two-story house and ours was a one-story house  and they were shooting from our backyard into that house across th e street back and forth.
Because during that time when the R.O.N.A. came into picture  and they started shooting civilians  50 000 of ar Soviets lost their lives because they were cleaning up  mercilessly  all the side streets  and every courtyard was a cemetery.
They were already determined to resist  those were young people determined to resist  and they were able to secure a few guns  and in August of 1943  they were shooting out from the kibbutz  and if they did some damage at all  nobo dy ever was able to discover.
The dog started to barking and growing and barking and he started shooting at the hole over there  whoever made it into the hole that they opened up was shot either wounded or killed.
As we were walking in  as I say  there was bodies laying literally all over the place.
Now  when he starts shooting at somebody else  I was the only one in the outfit that had rifle grenades.
They were capartmenturing our people  you know  from the train  they were shooting them in the back of the head  they kill them all.
Once they did  it was a tumult and they start shooting.
They put several people against the wall  against the wall  and I heard the I heard them shooting them  and they were killing them  that was the first thing.
I took a transport with my father and my...at that time she was already my step-mother  Rochele  all through to Bratislava and the AK was shooting after us  and I stopped the people because my step- 02:19: mother couldn't walk that well.
When  when we finally di dn't hear any more shooting and we were downstairs  some 78 people  I don't recall exactly how many  we expected 18 people to be downstairs because those 18 people knew about what we were doing  you know  they were in the same area.
That was the - then you saw so many dead people because the Germans were pu shing us to go west with their dogs  and whoever couldnt go  they would just shooting  like they couldnt - and  you saw those people.
It was one of the battles where one Ustasa force I think was in our backyard and the partisans were on the second floor of the house across the way and they were shooting at one another.
And th en suddenly  German airplanes came over us and began bombing.
Over there we heard bombs and they had shooting  they had [indecipherable]  we had everything.
So this after some times  we didnt wait too long  they started to shoot in the in our direction to hit this Germans.
The day before we could hear like shooting  cannons shooting  in the distance.
Because they were arguing  these SS  who should do the shooting when I be put against the wall.
Now the -- the Russian who was shooting at the jars  was laughing like a child.
Interview with Norbert Krasnosielski November 24  2009 34 At that time  when you were in Ladoga  were the Finns shooting at the Russians or not  and the Russians shooting at the Finns?
The German people  the Volksturm and the SS would drive the local farmers into shooting at us.
When we came to werk A  often  we have to they assembled us on a big assembly place  and we had to watch executions of prisoners by hanging or by shooting.
Within we had also shootings  like for instance  in the Krim-a-nall Po-da-sigh   Gooby Oben-stein-er who was the big shot there was sitting  when he was drunk he was sitting at the window and there was like a sniper  shooting.
It was a miserable night and every time the shooting started  the guards which were sending -- leading us out  made us lie down on the ground and wait until the shooting went over.
So then it occurred to me  since I was very lucky  I'm going to take a shooting star and have this as a symbol on my plaque.
Two days later we again were awoken by terrible uh noises of artilleries shooting but this time it was the real th ing.
All of a sudden the police run after us  start shooting.
Hitler and his army invaded Poland and uh there was far from the uh battle  about...uh because from west Poland to where I I'm in the south...Tarnow is in the south  middle of Poland  in the south Poland...about uh about over two hundred kilometer kilometer from uh German border over...so in uh almost two weeks we see the German airplane uh go around  even shooting uh people from airplane on the on the field  all over uh on the town  but there was no much bombing uh in the Tarnow or Krackow .
On a Friday n ight  we hear the artrillery  the things  shooting and they hit the barracks  a lot of people got killed and the Germans took off.
Ukrainian guard serving the Germans at that time was doingŠcontributing his killing by shooting people and torturing people inside the camp.
Because about  they were all  they made them undr ess and they were shooting them and they were falling into the graves.
Much of this is outdated now because if the warfare is by rocket and missile  it doesnt matter whether you do observed shooting or not.
We get up in the morning and here you got the same thing...all the guards and even worse b ecause they had new guards from the front  22 SS  and they was very cruel  you know  and they start shooting  you know  anybody  you know.
He was a dentist  and he we think that he was an executioner because whenever the grapevine said that there had been some kind of shooting of German dissidents  he was away from the business.
They came up to us  and said that were going to Germany because the Russian army is near  and well be shooted by them as collaborators to the Germans because were in ghetto  and theyre going to help us not to be.
And after when they start with all this shooting and all this thing.
They were actually shooting and I was hiding behind alongsid e the graves  because the route took me through the through the cemetery.
You see  in those days when you took a...when you were wounded  you were...you might as well shoot yourself and so uh they were shooting at us all day and then during the night they went after us  which was very unusual  and the way they went after us  they pretended that they were Russians.
At night when we went back  we had to run constantly because the shooting  you know  the Germans us  \ Faster!
21 Verpflegungsamt you could already see the fire  you could hear the shooting and the killing was going on  and before the evening came they put the ghetto on fire  because they couldn't find anybody.
They're shooting at the troops so the civilians are getting killed  so we stopped and we went and I remember we stayed...we slept on the floor with everybody packed in in what was built for soldiers to to stay.
I would only -- I would only look at Viel a nd I would recall during the hangs of the Serbs  the presence of German officer s from the Wehrmacht  who were standing there and looking at the shooters and executioners the way the other members of the officers school were standing there looking at Viel doing the shooting.
They were beating us  and we had to run to a square .
And we came out on the other side  and the other side  they were shoot the Pollacks  the A.K. were shooting on us.
You saw a lot of people getting shot  but most of the shooting wasn't done by the Germans.
And the guy just...(making shooting sounds)  and they hang them on top of that.
Yeah there was  there was one time when there was some shooting or some sniper or something but in general no.
So  we left the train so we  when we saw the train moving  we ducked a little  to be sure that they dont start shooting.
Maybe one day all of them woul d just  keep shooting until they shoot us all.
02:11:53 So anyway  we went back to the that night we had to run again  shooting as usual.
I mention you -- I mention you that the first -- th-the first and the only shooting from the gun  it was from the police gun.
I know exactly where youre speaking They took after the war  they put up a lot of the displaced persons up there  and the place was covered like a forest  because the Germans had secret installations there  were testing  I believe there  buzz bombs that they were shooting over into England.
14 German guards started to shoot on them from their rifles.
These pillboxes from which the Germans were shooting at the allies when they landed on the beaches  also.
We heard a lot of artillery on the way  heavy artillery guns shooting  banging.
Well  we heard the war approaching by gunfire and noises of weapons.
DL] So you said that you wanted the Red Cross to investigate the shooting? [
And right after we got into the houses  we could hear shooting and we more exactly  you know  understood that something was happening.
So we went underground  and then we-we-we heard fighting  and we just didn't know what to do  so we hid in-in basements as much as we could  until about few days later when we heard total silence  when we didn't hear any shooting  when we uh sent somebody out to uh find out whether it was safe to come out and when we came out indeed the Russians were there.
There were Communist parties  Nazi parties  Socialist parties  and they always scheduled marches about the same time and there always  somehow th ere was a shooting going on  and they yelling and they used to hit each other.
Because I wasn't in the town when they were shooting and all of that stuff.
We were absolutely green when we arrived in Egypt  and as we took the train from Port Said down to Cairo  there were men on horseback along the train shooting at us  just for fun.
They would shoot the German somewhere  and then the whole village gets killed.
I thought maybe because the war was coming  because at one point  the family had even a a kind of earth tunnel built  or something  that you could go in  if the bombs start falling  if they start shooting around.
I witnessed hanging  I witn ess uh shooting  I witness terrible beatings  I witnessed in Buchenwald where they had a hose with a regulator and had women out there by the wall pregnant  tried to see how much pressure it takes to make a hole in it.
So we we start  and this guy took off his rifle and started shooting one of the five.
But when were talking about massacres  are we talking about massacres of Jews  or are we talking about revenge shooting of communists  some of whom might be Jewish  some of whom would not be?
All of a sudden an airplane came  German  and the German lowered his flight very much and started shooting at that cow  at that woman  at that child.
Yeah  so we would stop shooting  you know  at our own people.
I am not le aving you here and I am not shooting you here\ .
What happened as we were marching uh to escape...to go to the ghetto  because they were shooting us at us from watch towers and we had to know where to walk  where the border wasn't undermined.
Interview with David Brombart May 7  2007 17 And on the ninth  some German paratroo per came  and I remember very well that there were some -- some shooting from one side or the other.
And there was a hugh celebration and the champagne corks popping  popping up  and uh soldiers shooting into the air.
Had he told me in Lithuanian what he was doing  I wouldn't have run  but I thought he was just going to -- because we could hear shooting all the time and I thought that he was just going to hit me with a boulder.
So I remember that I walked...while they were shooting from one side I walked to the other side.
I don't want to be to be to be kicked to death  because what happened here...for this there is no provision in the bible and in in our scriptures  and the next day I heard in the morning whatever shooting going on during the night.
They took us in the school  and afterwards they were shooting and when we got out there were white flags and there was bread the second time.
We went into the trenches and there were nobody else there and we were doing full  full shooting like on the shooting range and we knew safely we could manage and nobody train us.
Okay  a day passed by and the next day we hear...we're sitting in the house  you know  everybody sitting  you know  hiding  not to stick your nose out too far  and we hear shooting and shooting and shooting.
Originally  we thought maybe these were workers or whatever  but a little while later we found where all the shooting was going on.
As I wave  ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 12 suddenly a German started shooting.
and it it start shooting out the thing  but I was sleeping  I didnt know.
So everybody tried to hide from the other  and they were shooting them constantly.
And when they came to our block and came into the yard  they start looking around  they see too many people because people came from other buildings so they figured they'd scare and they start shooting.
They would often take pictures only when a local squad was -- was doing the shooting and so on.
Suddenly we hear the tremendous roar  noise  roar  uh  heavy artillery or tanks are moving from somewhere.
Well  I guess its I dont know  I it was all exciting  you know  especially  you know  when the shooting st arted.
They managed to survive 70 the shooting in the pit  and that night got out of the pit  found the two children alive  and they walked to Vilnius in the dark  towards Jewish hospital.
They took a lot of people from our end of town  this calls Alkinique   if you need the name  I don't think so  if you need the name  came people too  and we were all brought together until they took us on the big place  you know  on the marketplace  and from there they started shooting.
Well  in the ghetto uprising  I was not actually where the shooting was.
And about the time they came up they st art shooting  and they didnt even notice that they were already dead.
And he wa he sees he sa w some part of me  I guess that that he thought  or at least he thought he did  and he was shooting at  and he and he had put right in there.
There were people perished when the horrible accident was people were murder ed by the Germans  but they brought many people  of these 40 000  I estimate about more than half came from the  fr om the   from the .
So I want before we get there  I want to ask you  when you came back to Kretinga and you heard that the day or two be fore  there was this mass shooting of 50 people  those communist part y activists and and Jews  is this the first time that you heard of any kind of murder like this in Kretinga?
I recognize the star on the tank and I recognize their faces because their head was up out the tank  you know  looking with field glasses where they are or something  and I start getting up  to try to greet them and they start shooting at me.
When you were standing in the windows and you were shooting down at the parade.
And  you know  still  we were so starved that some of the prisoners tried to grab that decomposed food and eat  and these guys that was guarding us  they were wearing arm bands of surrender but they still were shooting at the prisoners trying to grab a hold of this and quite a few people were shot close to liberation that way.
And they started again with the killing there and with the shooting.
And...uh...finally  they...they couldn't shoot because they were afraid that if they shoot  they may shoot him  so they didn't shoot.
And we walked into Nachod; and that night I volunteered for Red Cross  because there was still shooting.
One fellow was sick because he was shooting at some uh...nest with soldiers  so they gave him a medal.
And she told me  now its back -- Shellneetsa is back to a shooting range.
>> Marcel Hodak: The underground actually killed quite a few of the Germans in that area.
They had machine gun towers all th e way around  and they were shooting machine gun bullets over our head  maybe a foot above our head  and they said  they made a  the commander made a speech  they said that if Germany  th is was the time of Germany taking over the------------- in Czechoslovakia.
He was running away also from his home because of the shooting  and fire  burning.
We was very lucky because next morning the -- some -- we heard some shooting  single shooting and we not believe our eyes.
They were still starting something then  and we start shooting at them.
At one point they came across a marsh near the side of the road and they were so thirsty that the people started running for the water and the Germans started shooting because they didnt tolerate the lack of discipline.
I don't know what it is in English  but it's the part of that -- the shooting part before you have to push it and pull it and everything.
Later I realized the German was scared because the Belgians resistance was attacking Germans at this point  throwing Molotov cocktails at them  shooting at them.
So this after some times  we didnt wait too long  they started to shoot in the in our direction to hit this Germans.
So  all of a sudden the Germans  you know  there was a shot -- we had a shot.
They were shooting Germans or Ukrainians or something and I was supposed to stand there and wait for the tank.
A lot of people went away to the Ninth Fort  and what the most terrible thing about the Ninth Fort or the Seventh Fort was in Kovno is that at night we heard the shooting of the people.
And we picked a time where they -- other people also tried to escape on both sides and the soldiers were busy shooting at other people and we escaped and they did try to shoot at us at that point  then we came into a forest.
And the principal said 23 ROUGH DRAFT COPY NOT A VERBATIM RECORD it's because they thought I was German.
The Germans were shooting other people and the refugees running away.
There were announcements that we better go to the ghetto or else they'd be shooting us.
We see the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 22 Germans going west.
He said  ﬁWhen we come to that kiosk ﬂ I was the first one at the sidewalk  ﬁyou go to the right.ﬂ I said  ﬁI'm afrﬂ -- in the back  the Germans were standing and shooting whoe ver would move  you know  they shoot.
I remember being on one of the trains and hearing a lot of shooting and thinking that we are being bombed but that was the celebration of VE Day and I arrived at that village.
And it was  suddenly there was trem endous amount of activity  uh shooting and so on.
I know that when I discovered the hole underneath our floor and I knew that the time would come when we have to run because we already could hear the  the shooting  the cannons and you could hear that they're coming closer and these things don't happen overni ght  not in one day.
I don't remember because it was just shooting and lots of dead  and we was walking in the bushes  and from both sides the SS with machine rifles they shoot.
Hanging  yes  shooting  yes  hit with you the rifle over the head  yes.
We laid on the ground and they kept shooting and we were seeing the death with our eyes which was our luck.
>> Marcel Hodak: Well  they were fighting in the streets and shooting the Germans to make them go out of town.
When the Germans came in and starte d shooting these people  did they somehow choose these people or did they just go around  find any Jews they could find?
And when I say a lot  I dont know how many  but I would say maybe a hundred people got killed by the Germans  because th ey started shooting  the Ukrainians and the Germans  everybody  because they were much more ready to combat all those people after the escape than before  because before it never happened  and - and those - Im sure that Chris and Renia must have told you th e story  how those people were moaning.
Simply was killed in the ghetto itsel f. All the shooting and all the killing was done inside the ghetto.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/PNINA TORY page 37 Interviewed (7-17-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: together with it s facilities  patients and medical staff has to be set on fire.
Planes were coming down  later on we found it must have been -- we were told  it was either American or English that we re shooting.
One heard a lot of shooting a-around and so we knew something big was -- was about to happen.
They didn't care who's shooting  or the German are there or nobody.
I just couldn't comprehend at that time what happened  why they are shooting the Jews.
Well  an order is an order  so he went and the girls called and instead of him shooting them  he told them  \ We are running.
He was shooting one of their I ca I cant remember the designation [indecipherable] 10 shot semi-automatic automatic rifles  that they designed and built to counter the M-1 rifle.
You know  people running away and and there was was shooting.
Now I ha d chances of shooting more than what I did  but I captured them mos tly  and I turned them over to the officer in charge.
From what I remember  it was not the fight that it is described as today  a band of desperate people shooting and so on.
Like wild animals withoutbecause we always hoping that the Russians would break this  this  we listen to their shooting from you know  the house.
indecipherable] a part of the Judenrat  not the -- nobody was a -- but he pol -- told us -- he told us he was -- around the ghetto he was a member of the Judenrat and he was supposed to be -- to accompany the SS when they lo -- loaded th e people on trucks  out to the -- to the shooting place.
Young girls 14 years old  were standing in the windows and shooting into the Soviet tanks.
So as we were walking  running from the thing  the guards with the side of the gun hitting us.
>> Patricia Heberer -Rice: I think  from going with you these past several years  that in the very early weeks of the war  when they were in Lithuania  the Germans were shooting just men and boys.
Suddenly while were ti Im arguing with him and Im ra crying  he suddenly we heard some shoo ting outside  fire they were shooting  gunfire.
And they had Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
And you could see the fires going  the shooting there thats going on.
And sometimes there wa s shooting right in front of us so we knew that things were terribly bad.
There was shooting in front of him  they were shooting people.
So we kept running in the woods and he was behind us shooting at us all the time.
They were even smiling because you heard them downstairs already yelling and screaming  and by the time they came up  they start shooting and they didnt even notice that they were already dead.
An d all of a sudden we heard shooting  and there was father and daughter.
Later on I will tell you of the fact that I went to Germany to be a witness and I...I apprehended the German who was instrumental in shooting all these people.
indecipherable] like young people  you know  shooting very well because was like a sport.
And they came in -- you know  they were telling us  we heard  what was happening.
They came off ﬂ she said  ﬁmake with your feet  just work w ith them  just like exercise with them  do something  because otherwise you're going to lose your feet.ﬂ Up there they were shooting us with airplanes and around they were shouting  the Germans were running.
To help there shoul dn't be any shooting  shouldn't be any killing.
So then I was in already and feeling less strange about a uniform and saluting and shooting and all that stuff.
Quite awhile before ghetto  one night  I believe about five people escaped th e shooting place Paneriai.
Was the first day or the second day of Rosh Hashanah  we heard  of course  shooting and this and that.
There were still guards in the in the towers and they kept shooting at random at uh at the ca...at the prisoners and one had to find a place to hide behind a barrack not to be exposed to line of 22 fire and uh then they took the German trustees out of the camp.
I saw Goeth many times and as soon as we heard he was walking through the camp  I was running away  because we knew he was target shooting  he didnt care what you looked like.
We left around -- before Christmas -- and then when my parents a couple of times asked Misha  \ What's the shooting up there?\
And only the same time these bombs was falling and  of course  the Lithuanians were so happy to see the Germans coming  they're sabotaging the Russian Army tanks  putting on fire and burning 6 the tire and shooting on them.
I lowered my head  there was shooting  lowered my head  made it into the woman's barrack.
You accept it that you just -- or you live for today  that you accept that a day passed by without any deportation  without any shooting  without any -- any decrees.
I was afraid not I was afraid because also the gun you heard by then you we re beginning to hear a lot of guns and shooting  and there were bombings  the Russians were flying over Budapest with their planes  and so on.
You know  they were on the roofs - the Germans on the roofs.
You have to remember  I was in the -- didnt get in the army til the end and we had heard all these stories  seen all these stories on TV about the Nazis and all this and youd see people -- them lining people up and shooting them and things like that and that bothered Interview with Dorothy Maroon 13 July 15  1995 you  but -- and that was it.
And there were the Germans standing with the um rifles up high like this  shooting in case somebody wants to jump out of a window.
Well  we had -- we had excursions with our friends and we would dress in khaki little uniforms  and go out and -- and stay in tents a nd -- and practice shooting and practice I dont know  running and doing things together.
So uh uh even  you know  when you wanted to go to the toilet and so you had you had to to to honor by taking off your cap and asking for permission  for his permission and so on and what they did in order to play around was very often to take  when you when you take off your cap  take the cap and throw it away and when the moment when you...when the people went to get  to collect th e cap  then the SS man was shooting him on the pretense that he was trying to uh to uh to uh run away  so uh that...and this this was the uh the situation the first couple of weeks.
Uh he talked him out of shooting him and took the broken down watch and left but uh there was uh--uh quite a commotion.
One of the things I remember doing -- this was a great sort of past time at that point  this shows you how ch ildren are children -- shooting at things that I don't know whether people still know what that is -- the electric wires and telegraph on poles ar e held up  wired ar ound porcelain  white porcelain sort of  what would you call it  cu ps or -- .
In fact  I was talking to you  Im I was jumping from one camp to another  the killing  the shooting  th-the some of the of the prisoners are collapsing and I see them ba b-being hit.
By that point  we got shot down -- Allies planes were all over the trains  shooting down.
So we went there to dig it up and these damned Hungarians they started shooting and they killed girls.
Was there still gunfire  shooting going on in the -- You heard gunfire  yes  yeah.
The Germans were digging in and the allies were shooting them.
Please start with the shooting when the people tried to attack the food barrack.
I remember the first time I had the shooting  Im telling you  you couldnt cut my couldnt cut [indecipherable] in my my body.
So she was frightening and I was telling her stories and you had to get your head down because they were shooting.
DL] Because Reynolds  Corporal Reynolds shooting was investigated [RJ] I never heard anything about it at all.
So then when I took place Working transcript: not spell checked or verified for accuracy.
And listen  behind the wall maybe couple hundred corpse there and one day was some shooting from the tower  one of the tower near the crematorium where I lived was shooting and the bullets go all over and we was be killed.
She remained and at that moment when we were ready to leave the little town for a village they started shooting.
They were taken against the wall and they were shot at.
I remember some shooting was going on like it was here and there.
So my uncle people were running like like crazy  were u one on this way  one that way  one the other way around  cause they got so scared  frightened  you know  from those from those Germans  the when you come in somebody comes in in a house and starts shooting and breaking and ca and hitting you  thing  you get scared and you run every a-all over.
And I led them directly to the guards building and when we st arted running away  they noticed us and they started shooting.
And I th it went up in the air  the machine guns started  and they were firing at me.
Which was a big mistake  cause we got caught in the middle of shooting  the Germans -- a nd the French liberated us  the French and the Moroccans.
They were very agitated because of the fact they...uh...witnessed shooting  my parents and relatives  my friends and so on.
In uh '39 another brother in Tarnow was uh was uh when there was...the war action was shooting  my brother's six year old...he have...uh wounded  but he die after uh a couple day from the wound  when the front come through.
She said in the morning you run away from there  and with that kind of thought I wake up and I   they are shooting people all over the village.
But the shooting was alrea dy going on  we can he ar this.
And I was very nervous  of course  when you had to run; and then we heard shooting already in back of us  and we heard  screaming.
If he was doi ng the shooting or somebody else was doing  I don't know ex actly  but I know they were in that group of starting the shooting where stopped the deportations .
My brothers went and my father and myself stayed home  he said  \ No  we will wait until everybody else got their cards and then we'll go.ﬂ And sure enough when the people arrived there for cards they were surrounded and enclosed in a large yard  an outdoor movie house all walled in by stone walls  and shooting started.
And we were taken into trucks and...uh...we drove a distance and then we were told to get off the trucks and we saw some houses and everybody started running to...to...uh...find... They told us to get off and get into the houses  and then there was shooting and some people were killed.
Without  without any warning  the they shooting the German with heavy guns  machine guns are shooting  and and and we hear from far away distance artillery  shooting in our direction and explosions all around.
In the courtyard  they were with the rifl e  with their rifles  screaming \ raus  raus  raus \  and shooting.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/JACOB LEWIN page 8 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: SB: So shooting and shouting and the hospital was burning--all of that was going on at the same time?
And we had grenade shooting and we had special training ones  they became quite frequently distributed  the anti-tank weapons.
As soon as we ---already slowed the Jews where th ey were disposed into the mass grave  the German criminals resumed the shooting and immediately the dead  dying  half -alive  and heavily wounded began falling into the second grave.
And when I was jumping through the bridge  I heard shooting -- [Imitating shooting sound].
And at that time when they start shooting at me  my stuff went up in the air.
Well  we heard the war approaching by gunfire and noises of weapons.
The other is now a shooting range   so that was very touching.
Did your parents talk about that  that they were coming in and just taking people and shooting them or taking people out of the ghetto?
Can you imagine  the Russians were right outside the gates and here the Germans were shooting in with machine guns!
He just took out his pistol and started shooting around  wanting him to dance.
14 year olds  15 year olds  16  20  18--so you kids  get out  we'r e going to engage them with a little bit of shooting  and uh  you  while when we do it  we'll cover you.
The first time the planes start shooting  the guards jumped off the cattle car  open cattle car.
There was a lot of shooting going on and uh then it became quiet.
Now  why was it that they beheaded  uh  your father and brother and other Jehovah's Witnesses  instead of just shooting them?
There was Polish resistance in both parts of the main streets of it was called at the time in Rovno  I remember there was a militar y church where they were hiding  the Polish police was hiding and as the Russian soldiers with their equipment were coming in they were shooting at them from behind the buildings and some of them got killed an d then they killed all the police that were shooting at them.
Well  they went to Agnes Adachi 32 October 14  1995 Buddha and they were still shooting over here and they were fighting all the time and that was terribly dangerous because a friend of mine told me that their little daughter they wanted to save and would I take her to the nuns and they were fighting on the streets and I said of course I take the child.
He too  came deeper into the forest and he heard all of the shooting.
And when he came outside  they were shooting in the air and laughing  and then kicked him out.
The SS came  start shooting  start hollering everybody down  everybody down in the court yard  and I said to my mother  \ What we gonna do?\
Did they -- were they gonna shoot -- were they shooting Jews?
They were already  you know  shooting and it began on my to the way home.
But during the war  he parachuted but the Germans caught him.
So were you in a shooting war  were you actually in battle?
We pulled them back and they were shooting at us and yet still they pulled them in  in spite of the bullets.
The one that was picked was the women's barrack  shooting into that.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/HENRY KELLEN page 32 Interviewed (5-6-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: doing the killing  they were burning the houses and we saw house after house  bodies of Papa  Momma  and children burned and smoke.
Sometimes I was sitting in his car and shooting from the car  and sometimes I just went around looking left or right like nothing happened and take the pictures.
That I remember too  the tram number one was actually traveling from nearby where my father was staying  but hes quite a lot across from where we lived  and by the time we were passing mid-after sitting in the in the train and train was going  and we started hearing something like bombs  or so me shot shooting  or something that sounded like thunder  or we didnt know what it was.
That very morning on the 6th of January  we noticed shooting.
So anyway  I I got a while while he was shooting  h-he to he change his his targets then.
Just took out his rifle and shot the guy right in the face  in the front.
What happened  why  why they were not here about a couple months earlier  or at least 3 days earlier  because from May the 8th till May 11th  we still were in a big danger because they were shooting people  shooting from outside to the camp  they knew some of the Germans knew who are inside  and one of the guys was wounded there.
Were they shooting from [indecipherable] They -- oh  it can -- yeah  for instance  there was a very tragic story in the ghetto  which happened to a half Jew  Argie Saviskas.
