Yes  we can kill these two -- three guys  and after that  well have to run.
Well -- and she was very kind  and she wouldnt kill a fly.
Either they will kill us the same day  there will be no pain any more so we were happy  we were very happy that they took us out from there.
And I remember th-th-the ne-next day or two the -- the woman from which we rented th-th-the -- the apartment  she came to my mother and he said  ﬁYou know  it will be much better for you if you leave  because they are planning to kill you.ﬂ And  because from th e beginning  she didnt know that we are Jewish  but somehow you know  those people around  they f ound out.
So they again took us into a place where -- enc-enclosed place  about -- I dont know  couple of hundred people  hostages  and they threatened they will kill us if they are not delivered.
They did -- they -- obviously they werent going to shoot her to kill her  because they wanted that to teach other people a lesson.
And  if they'll catch me there  all they can do is kill me.
And even in concentration -- in the sanitarium  when I saw a blond with blue eyes  I said  he's going to kill me.
They run away because the Ukrainian used to kill Poles  to start the war between the Poles and Ukrainian.
By then they was looking for Jews  to kill them because they wanted  they knew that a lot of Jews survived after the war from the Nazis  but they don't want should be Jews by the Polish.
Perhaps  perhaps the Russians will be liberating us before the Germans have a chance to kill us.
And he started bleeding and they took him  and interesting  they didn't kill him.
Or thats -- give them the right to kill you  or all kinds of other reasons.ﬂ Which  you say how ca -- how can people  in their sane mind  make that comparison  be that its Kosovo  be that its Mozambique.
So not only did they save my life  but they risked their lives and they saved me.
CY: I dont remember  but they didnt kill them in the house.
And really I was scared that the people are going to kill me  the hungry people  you know  but they didnt.
The Ukrainians  the Croatians and naturally the Polacks  the Polish people  bad.
And  if they catch me   obviously  they will kill me  but I will never say that you are going with me.
And he went to Auschwitz   and they couldnt kill him.
It's unbelievable what educated professors with their own hands were able to kill babies.
He didnt want to come into Auschwitz and they were standing there and shooting.
Well  physically  if something doesnt kill you  it makes you stronger.
But the Germans  they would take me  too  if I approached them.
And they tried once to kill him in letting one of the big truck drive in to Raoul Wallenberg's car  but Raoul Wallenberg wasn't there.
I dont know why he didnt kill me on the spot  but why he took me.
And then you would return back to -- Then when we heard that they left  and once they caught us  the Germans.
I want to kill the son of a bitch.ﬂ Well  I said  ﬁNo  Mike.
I don't know   I don't think I could kill a person.
The one thing bad that he -- Hitler did  it was that he didnt kill the whol -- whole Jewish population.
Either they can kill them all and the Germans did on their own or they can uh maybe sometimes uh intervine but uh they did not.
ﬁIf one man runs away  we kill 20  we kill 50 whatever we feel like we will kill because one man runs away.ﬂ And I told them the story.
And they wouldn't kill him in the ghett o  what survive.
In order to make free of Jews they had to kill all the all the people  but then it happened to them  because Hungary claimed that this this territory belonged to them.
After 44  how could a Jew hit another Jew because the Jew wears a hat?
We finally did arrive -- we finally did arrive at the destination in three days fa -- after three days Interview with Henry Greenbaum December 20  1999 41you finally arrived in this camp  it was ve ry scary for me personally  with -- to see all these electric wires with the -- with the current would kill us  with seven foot tall  they had to be at least  or 10 foot tall.
You go to the hospital and instead of cure you they kill you over there.
Run to a country that is not going to kill you.
But if -- believe me  if this somebody will caught me in this moment at -- in the desk of the ser outi brand  they will probably  i-in spite of some friend will kill -- they will kill me  or send to the concentration camp.
We thought they were taking us to kill is  so I wasnt sure if I should do it  but then I saw my girlfriend Yannina.
We thought he's either going to kill us all or he's going to take us to the city  but he d idn't.
The Germans caught the first Russian soldiers who came in  and they bind them together and they put a grenade between them and they kill them there  on the garbage there.
Anyway  so you  you get used to it and see suddenly a bunch of houses that look like being under construction  but they were destroyed  you see only some walls standing and you hear cruel things like one family decided not to go in the bunker and they were found in bed on the next block  you feel these tremendous deprivations and so you then develop  oh a small minority will say we asked for it  the majority will say  will display a tremendous amount of anger  would say oh  let's help to kill the enemy  so there are very few people  in reality who said  well really  we begun it.
He wanted to kill Goebbels Interview with Ursala Guttstadt McKinney 83 and Goebbels said ok  if you kill me I will talk.
and uh  they didn't even look at me  and they were afraid to say anything  and was sort of strange  they have to recognize me.
I was alone and nobody could help me and I was afraid that somebody kill me in Irkutsk.
And he looks up at me  and he says  I have to kill you.
And and if I would do it something so even if I was safe too  they would kill my mother  you know.
We leave the people who are able to work alive  and let them work and then they're through when they cannot do it anym ore  then we have time to kill them  so we went marched about every 5  5 miles  no 5 kilome ters  maybe 2 to 3 miles  and we ended up in Buna  Auschwitz  this is Auschwitz 3.
They kill him before they brought them in the camp  so it was terrible.
And they emptied the camps what what they couldnt kill  they march  and put them on the streets  and t hey marched.
they used to kill the children and take them away from the parents  and so on.
I belonged to -- years ago was famous Jewish big man  Ebenezer  and I belonged to a group that people -- it was a boy 14 or 15  just to kill the time  and entertaining.
I had to show them that they didnt kill everybody  that I survived.
From other towns also  all the Jewish people were forced in that ghetto.
Wasn't so easy for us to take the decision  but the...all fact responsible are this bombing would kill anot her number of Jews.
And maybe I -- we -- that hope that somebody will come and kill us  maybe that kept me alive  because you know  I saw how my girlfriends were dying of -- I -- you know what durpol is?
And just because if I'll run away  they're going to kill my whole family.
Now they they didnt come to hound Jews  they they didnt come just this was not a Jewish thing  this was ever ybody.
5 In those camps  they did not have to kill us.
56 And of course Stangl would have thought th at it was a mercy to kill Stephen Haw -- Stephen Hawking.
If they will kill me  let them kill me when I will not see it.
I mean they did  I mean they kill us without even I mean  we are not human beings with them.
One woman stops  \ Little girl  get up  get up  they'll kill you.\
Instead of forbidding the kosher slaughter  we were given a contingency; in other words  you can kill so many so that  in its  tells the wrongs.
And the feelings you have had since about -- how did it feel to kill someone  because you ju -- CE: You are not amont  you -- you live differently in a situation like that.
I think they had an order how many they needed to kill.
Nu  you cannot come from when they come to come to kill somebody.
Dont talk.ﬂ I was afraid they were going to take my father  too  and he went to kill me.
9 Pollack that Jesus was a Jew  he would kill you it.
And thats where they were telling  they were looking at those numbers like  ﬁI w ould kill you ﬂ you know?
So many people that because it 10 was a narrow street  police had to be brought in every time when we had services in order that when the people leave the synagogue they shouldn't kill each other.
And you were forced to go to Russian school once the Russians were in  right?
Because we didn't know -- we didnt know what the Germans going to do to us  see?
They caught the guard s  they caught the camp commandant  beat them up not to kill them but because they wanted to burn them alive  and they did.
So I had opportunity to kill Germans  but I couldnt do it.
So that was the veryŠ I: So this was the Hungarian government that said you can no longer kill cows according to the Jewish faith.
If one escaped  they would round up ten people and kill them - shot them.
So they didn't want to give it up  so it was easier to kill the Jews who claimed that instead of giving up theirs.
The Jewish people had to deliver the fur coats otherwise they could take them to the concentration camps or they could kill them if they didn't -- you know what I mean.
But they said  Interview with Dino Brugioni November 13  2014 77well  the one guy said oh yeah  well  we can t we cant we cant gas them  but well well u well kill them with rifles.
And all of sudden  the camp commander comes to us and he says  \ The Russians are coming  and...uh they're going to kill us.\
17 A. When it was a labor camp  there was no kill ing.
You see  in order to kill people the killers have to be motivated to do it and in order to be able to kill so many people  you know  we talk about killing so many people.
Nothing that was going on except a certain kind of restriction such as that the Jewish people could not anymore have beef because they did not allow any more to kill cows according to the rituals of the Jewish faith.
And Eichmann's answer was  \ I know that if they catch me I will be killed  but I took it to my head to kill everybody  and I will  but you're disturbing me.\
I still cant understand how can they kill so many people  and looking for God.
An d I cut myself with razor blades intending to kill me.
Because if she wouldn't show up  they  they would kill her.
They came back from Warsaw and they told us -- they said that they were going to kill Polish Jews.
The worst part is to be sent into the area  to the occupied area  because children  they are fighting and children throw stones and stones kill.
If a SS man would caught me  he would kill me right away.
Over and over  is lost and lost and lost  lost  you go kill yourself.
We are Jews and we will...we will ...we won't kill you.
And then eventually in '41 I think -- 11th of '41 or thereabouts -- Hitler decided to kill -- take the final solution.
And so they told us to get the hell out of the camp.
Take us to the Partisan s  or kill us  or do whatever you want  it must come to an end.
You had to do what the Germans wanted you to do.
You were a girl so you were not circumcised  thats wh y. So the Germans were looking for circumcised boys to kill them  and they killed them righ t there at the spot.
When they would kill th e cows  the oxen  he would take the leather and tan it.
I can only tell you that I had only one pair of shoes and one little underwear  my whole thing was a little package  and I took this package one day and I said to mother I arrived at mother's place and said you can kill me here.
That time I think they didn't know that they're going to take all the Jews and kill them.
So anybody who wanted to kill a Jew and take their money  they just did it.
And if somebody would come to them  they say  \ I want to join you \  they would kill them right away.
And yet  there are people who get down to where they say to themselves  if if I dont join that gang  the gang is gonna kill me  so I better join the gang.
Even though I remember disc ussions in our groups at that time  quoting a very fa -- very  very famous saying of the philo -- Jewish philosopher Maimonides  that if the enemy comes  and he is asking to hand him o -- ha nd them over one person that they are going to kill  the community should never accept it.
And I loved her  you know  I could kill for her.
It turned out that they werent bad people  they didnt kill us.
And then later she wrote to me  which I never answered  she said  ﬁWell  I didnt ﬂ -- I accused her of being antiSemitic  she said  ﬁBut I didnt kill nobody  but you are a murderer.ﬂ Why am I murderer?
My answer to them is I resisted for every day  because his aim was to kill me and I am still alive.
And the it was very un we used to scratch all day  you know  and finally we used to find the lice and kill the lice.
And she was...when she was close to the fence  he say...he told him  \ Give a command to kill her  and he jumped and killed her.ﬂ And this was so parallel to our lives.
No every day  first of all  the place to kill people was on the Zeromskiego  on mine place.
They killed -- from house to house they been walking and kill now Jews the street.
So finally they permitted to kill kosher so much and so mu ch.
When the Germans came in and starte d shooting these people  did they somehow choose these people or did they just go around  find any Jews they could find?
Once he came over to me  and he took me in and he took me in a corner and he said  \ See  I got a gun.
So why should you kill 10 Jews when you had only l Jew.
He ran out and he pointed his gun at this young man and he started shoutin g for him to come back or he would kill him but this fellow continued to row for about another half a minute.
And I used to go to the high school and talk to the teacher and I got so angry  I was going to kill her.
I mean  its I understand  walking through the desert you had to keep your hygiene so that you stay alive  cause the not enough water and and p-plagues and bad food could just kill a whole family  whole tribe.
And I dont know who  the Hungarians  or what  but a few young ladies  they were took out  and -- But they didnt kill them?
They say they finished everything  they were going to kill us.
They didn't kill all of them right away  but after a couple of months  yes.
So I said  \ Listen  if you want to kill you  you have to find this rifle.
So they will kill you  and they will kill him  so but then they finally gave him stop stopped to take him.
I was  I was afraid to kill a fly  and here I had to lay between the bodies and pull the bodies  and it just became like a nonsense you know  like  like  not like a human being.
I me an he stole a chicken  he said he stole  take him behind the wall and shot at and kill him.
Hitler said in a speech in 1937  he said  take the Jews or we'll kill them.
We knew about this  that they were going to kill here too  but we had no choice.
Everything was private also  whatever it was  and he wanted to kill us with the horse  you know  with the and one he near ly killed.
And he says  \ You gonna marry me or I'll kill you  kill myself.\
A letter bomb envelope is an ordinary looking envelope which has a paper inside and at the bottom of it there is black powder and a detonator so when you pull it out the detonator explodes the powder and it will kill anybody who has it in their hands or anybody nearby.
So  of course  you kill them all  thats the best way to get to redress the problem.
And th eyll just take us like everybody else  and kill us.
The Jews were no longer allowed to kill their animals in the ritualistic way by shekhting.
And then we...uh...after...after German they posted the Germans  we used to fell...came after them and we used to kill them.
And you would have meat to eat along with the goose fat.
I dont remember  but it was walls and walls and we didnt let him and he was denounced by a janitor from the place where it was in the factory  that he said when Hitler will come  my father will kill him.
And then we were told that there every time if anyone tried to escape they were going to kill 15 guys for every one that tried to escape.
So  we were excused for the hour and the three of us  there was another girl and we used to sit in the cafeteria and just sit and kill an hour.
And th-they had a little food what somebody gave them  if they didnt kill them.
We cannot take it as for granted that a person uses a gun to kill to name him a killer.
And you're... I used to...I used to..the only thing he used to used to send me to a village  I know  and I used to commit the the the...he told me who to kill.
Just like an ant  you step on it and kill it  right?
I tell you  they will kill me  if they w ill kill us all  only once.\
There were a lot of -- in Theresienstadt -- war heros  like Simon  whom they didn't want to kill off either.
And he says to me  if he comes to my house  Im going to kill him.
SE: The partisan or the not Jewish partisan what lived in the woods  they want to kill all the Jews what lived in that village.
And we found out about it and I applied for that and I got accepted so I was the only female student  Jewish  sitting with all former Nazis  Nazi soldiers  Hitler yoogunt that dur ing breaks made the same remarks that I used to hear before that how sorry they are that they didnt kill off all the Jews and that they had to do it 30 over again  they would volunteer over again and they had no hesitation admitting how  how they are looking forward to the Nazis coming back and regain ing the power.
Germans would kill people on the spot or take them to the place where they kept them for a few days and then take them to the concentration camps  extermination camps.
Then I asked the head of the barrack  will they kill all the children?
I dont want that on my conscience  they should kill my parents  my sister and brothers.ﬂ They said goodbye to me.
You couldn't think about it because you were hoping they should kill you.
He's gonna do this  and he's gonna do that  and he's gonna kill this one.
We  we met a group of the  from the  Shtowfumbergs that had tried to kill Hitler.
If you want to kill her  first y ou have to kill me so I wouldn't know it.
That's an individual that's trying to kill you and it doesn't make any- But when you see something where here is a  s- here are individuals by the dozens that have done nothing to no one.
They want to find out how we are treated .If we told him; we are treated by ou r own people  they kill him on the spot.
The Germans wanted to kill us because we were Jews and we were going to win this battle with them as Jews and we were going to surviv e. And so the Judaism that Thomas Buergenthal 22 November 28  1995 Page 22 was instilled in me was the Judaism that said that we were going to win over the Germans  we're not going to let them kill us and we were going to be proud of the fact that we can survive.
What I remember   I  I was  my parents were in contact with the family what we had in America  of course  that  you know  my brot her was in America  my aunt was in America  not my mother's family  they were all kill ed.
The young people  they were accumulating themselves  mostly men  in the first ghetto in case they're going to start taking us on trucks to kill.
Wherever they found a kid  they kill him and is - on the spot [indecipherable] or th-the kid was small  they took them by the legs and hitting w ith h-his head th-the -- the building wall  and -- and throwing on the -- on the lorry.
Theyd kill -- some mother killed their own children  in fright.
And I did talk in these reports not only about conditions in the and how the prisoner of war were Interview with Joseph Eaton August 1  2010 65organized and how they had been able to kill some of the guards  but I also talked about the fact that there were special problems with Jews who didnt want to be with Poles  and certainly didnt want to be with Germans.
Now how did -- I mean  if youve done this  it seems like it -- if youve done this  how come the guards didnt kill you  I mean shoot [indecipherable] Well  you know  their minds were already on other things.
The German Jews  its a big thing that comes out of this  wanted to be Germans.
He said don't go ; they will kill you  this and that.
Sometimes I slee -- during the night I get up  and I says  you know  you killed somebodys child.ﬂ And then one of the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0064 61 fellows said  ﬁYou know  I felt the same wa y.ﬂ I dont know if its compassio -- what about a chi -- ki [indecipherable] was -- I kill ed somebodys child.
They couldn't go ahead  just pick the pistol and kill somebody.
She on the of the day I think th e day  a couple hours later  before the Russian came in  a guy recognized her and he called a a German  they kill him kill her.
My sister said  \ If they want to kill us  let them kill us.\
I said: Look  remember when it was forbidden to kill for kosher  only once a week.
Every cat didnt do his job and kill mice or rats  cat was gone.
He took out the gun and he start to kill one of the Germans...the Gestapo man by the name of Ron .
So they argued for a while  and I told the ambassador that it is my job to go home to my parents because they might kill the whole family.
Well  when they got in  the Ge rmans  and the Lithuanians lose  it were the Lithuanians done the biggest mistake: kill the Jews.
Yes  to come to ghetto  it was no two blocks in the city and if you late to come in the ghetto  they will kill you after the time they give one hour to come in this place.
Pollacks came over to me and they said they will kill all of them if they wouldn't stop gr abbing the chickens and the food in the night.
And some who were belonging -- used to belong to the Communist party -- of the -- maybe they went down there  I dont know who were -- the enemies of the Germans and theyre afraid the Germans is going to kill them.
In case we have to run  theyre going to kill us  I knew I have to go down there.
He said  ﬁMaybe if you kill me because I...ﬂ But they couldnt kill him.
He said  I can kill you  nobody will do anything to me  I can kill you here  if you want to run to the ghetto.
When he met the Americans  he told them  look  I have written orders to kill everybody but I chose not to.
They didn't kill you  but it was not easy to live and to be somebody else.
If my daughter told me that she met somebody and was getting engaged in one week  I think Id kill her.
How does an educated person let himself get away to kill other people?
Then she says  well  I kill myself  or I go shopping.
They wanted maybe we should--if not  they--they going to kill us maybe--the English.
They were all on the outskirts of Germany  because  like I said  when the War would have been over  and Hitler would have won  he would have said he did not kill the Jews.
And I believe because of that...the # +O ghetto had to sacrifice a lot of people for him because they wanted to punish US and took some innocent people and just 26Wtg t3 did kill them Xe=roTth of that in cident.
They were desperate to send as many Jews as they could to their death  actually.
It was -- it was winter  snow was on the ground and anybody that fall out of line or couldnt keep it up  they ju -- they would just kill.
But in 1943 we heard stories that they were deporting Jews to kill them.
And he -- the way Germans acted  they kept-- they kept the doctors over there  and when epidemic was over they used to kill these doctors.
They will  they will want to shoot and there are Jews around and so we believe that we will survive.
He said  ﬁI'll kill you.ﬂ He thought that I'm running to the Germans.
The -- the partisans [indecipherable] if you left the city you expose yourself  because they were there to -- to hit and kill as ma ny Jews as they could -- thats many Germans as they could.
Pogrom is something that individual citizens kill other citizens strictly for monetary values  monetary reasons.
And then he heard they were talking in the village that they want to kill us  the Jews.
Do -- How do you remember seeing Germans arrive into your town?
It was the s it was the same kind of It was the same kind  except that except that the 1945  the postwar anti-Semitism was made more acceptable because the war taught the Poles that to that you may kill Jews with impunity.
They came in at night and took all the Jews to kill more  whatever the survivors that was there after the war  after this.
You see  ther e was still the possibility of surviving  if the sickness didnt kill you  if they didnt shoot you  if the dogs didnt tear you to shreds.
They going to kill you.ﬂ I say  \ Well  what is the difference?
It means that they want to kill us  so what happened if I would be a religious Jew  I would say it was something incredible.
So he told my mother if she had snaps one more time  \ I kill her.\
I came there  we came there in June  1939  my mother had been kill ed in November  1938 and I went to the synagogue to say Kaddish and I came to the synagogue and I wanted to say a certain prayer which we usually say if someone is saved from a danger  they say a certain prayer  which is called Gomelbenchen  you see and th ere were all people there and they said  \ You don't have to say that.\
And in White Russia  the Jews  I don't know how long  but the Jews who still live in Lithuania  they are going to kill all the Jews.
The plan was to kill us  but they just plainly didn't have time and I survived.
And then a-all the whole story  that the mufti ran to Berlin from there and asked Hitler to build crematoriums to to kill Jews and an-and things in in in Israel.
They are going to kill their whole family  and the killing going on and going on and going on  until they come  until to Warsaw.
And they wanted to kill me   and now the men saved me.
You can rope  you can steal  you can kill  do whatever you want.
We know if we not -- well be fighting  they would be -- they would kill us.
That was their name  that was their main thing  to kill all the Jews.
And in real life they were not allowed to kill Jews  but if they caught the Jews they killed them.
I had to  when this shot was going  to kill us and I raised my hand and I said  I did it with this little French boy and somehow  you know  I spoke to him and one the Germans said -- and they were also Partisans there -- and they took us and put us with this man  and was almost big  big  man for the German and said  where is the gun?
If they catch me there  for surely they are going to kill me because I have a wound on the head already  tried to escape.
And from the time we arrived in August until September  they had time to analyze us and prepare listing so everybody who they intend to kill.
Now  somebody ask me not long ago  w ould you be able to kill?
When the Germans came in  from the very beginning  they concentrated and they let it be known that the Jews are the ones that they are going to try to murder  all of us.
If it...there was not any single ma n  not in the Kovno ghetto  not in any other 18 ghetto in...in Lithuania or in Poland that dare speak to a liquidator of the ghetto the way he spoke because they could just wi th one...with one finger on his...on...on...on his bayonet it would kill him.
But I think they had an order how many to kill that night and half of our transport went straight to crematorium.
So they said it gonna be  he...they...he had heard it whenever they took out the people to kill them or to burn them or to take them to the gas chambers  they said he's never gonna come again.
I am not sure whether I was afraid that if they find me  they are going to kill them  as well.
So the walking of the ghetto  from our apartment to a friend  was really eliminated  because we were afraid that they were going to kill us.
Was th -- the woman before was afraid of being caught  she said -- Yeah  she says  if they gonna find out that shes saving the j -- Jews  they gonna kill her.
Kill the old ones first and the very young ones  the babies.
I saw some people were able to go into the kitchen  they went into the kitchen and they did get something extra and like you say  they would kill you for it.
You know  when he interviews the Sonderkommando in Auschwitz  and you saw people that were really on the other side  in Auschwitz  helping Germans to kill Jews  frankly to kill Jews.
And everybody said  all the others were saying dont volunteer  dont volunteer  theyre going to kill you.
He came out that 75 percent Pole s will give out a Jew  or kill a Jew  but he said 24 percent wouldnt help  and wouldn t give out.
So thats why they -- they didnt -- they didnt execute him  they didnt kill him like they did Eichmann and the other ones.
But first they start to kill the innocent people  and the German dropped the bomb on the hospital.
I mean punks because they were 12 and 13 year old analphabets  but they gave them the gun and they said  \ Kill.\
Most of them had a famous saying; Im sorry they didnt kill you too.
I say and the same thing and this time  you know  I don't know if you know  Masaryk 55 was the president from Czechoslovakia  he kill himself and this started the trouble with the Communists.
And I had everything I could do to control my temper  and not kill the three of them right then and there.
But these people didnt kill  I mean  all -- at -- at the top.
The only memories I have is this farmer who took care of the fields where they grew the vegetables  one day they decided  somebody decided  they were going to kill the cows so they could feed the ki ds.
And the men would go out at night and shoot the tires of Nazi munitions trucks and grab guns and ammo and grenades.
They said  \ Well  if they will come here and fight  we will maybe help you to kill them both and will be war over.\
Is it moral to go out and kill a doctor  whats left four little children behind?
How can we face the world  ho w can we look at people that they wanted to kill us?
to to the to ta basically take the shower  and instead of water coming out  a gas comes out of the shower things  and you and you kill them by the hundred.
And I was not allowed to show my face  but they were afraid that they might kill me.
Maybe we should throw him or whatever  but there were so many other barges in back of us we thought they were going to kill us all so we didn't do anything.
Then one time  I remember  I got a chicken for--for a table cloth and um the chicken was live and we had to kill it.
And if she's a Jew I call the Gestapo  we're going to kill her  she doesn't want to sell me eggs.\
Now you knew that the Germans were murdering Jews in Auschwitz.
And they said anything happened they will cut our hair off and if you should try to escape theyll kill us and you know.
A-Americans came  British [indecipherable] Indians  who are savages  lets kill all the Indians  you know.
I am not to kill you  I'm in the same boat like you are  and I'm going to save you as much as I can.
What he said  Id never forget  he says  you dirt y Jews  you think I will help you?
The SS  the Gestapo  the Shutzpolizzi  the Geheinpolizzi  they're the ones  this was the elite who want to kill the Jew.
But she said  oh  you should -- I hope you can get out of here to some labor camp or something because in the concentration camp they'll kill you for sure.
He was a little bit crazy  and they called in and said they are going to kill him.
It we could nt attack one another with enough strength to harm  or certainly to kill one another  but we had be we did become a a a pack of of animals.
It was at night  I was layi ng in bed and they tr ied to--my heart was pu mping like this and I figure if they kill me here  I don't go out from that bed.
Not everybody wanted to be a -- a cop or not everybody wanted to be policeman  not everybody wanted to participate and go and kill and -- an-and -- an-and -- an-and do all kind of criminal -- commit all kind of atrocities like that.
Its unbelievable because he didnt have to take me out to shoot  to kill  he could kill me on the place.
Told her she was only 8 years old  that the Germans would go inside and kill me.
They confiscated Jewish property to pay the German to kill the ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 8 Jews from which they confiscated the property.
It was the -- they used to call it the aktion that when they rounded Jews  and these -- or kill them  or si -- took them with their cart to th e forest.
They would even be a danger for the German soldiers passing by.
You know now you work and in one hour you dont know if he will kill you or he will kill somebody in the family.
And he came to the archives and said : T here is knowledge that the Slovaks paid the Germans; that was part of the funding to kill the Jews and I want to find the document a nd you have the document s omewhere because the Museum got from the Slovak government  from the Czech -Slovak government  copies of all the archives of the fascist government  archives relating to the Jewish question  quote/unquote.
So sh e...it was crying this  but I had to go because she...she says you bed the of your sister because her...her...they will kill her right away.
What I found is that uh  we  that human beings in general  we live by circumstances  everybody is able to steal  to kill  to do everything what he ought to do at the proper time.
Its not like today a bunch of hoodlums want your money and they kill you just for the money.
If you didn't  that was good enough cause for the Germans to beat you  kill you  or whatever it is because we had no rights  so he did not have to bring in front of the court or anything like that.
But what happened was  all the others were sent to concentration camps.
It was in a guy tried to escape but the SS did not kill him.
Some of them were happy to kill us and hit us and do the worst that they can do to people.
So  there was no reason to kill the village doctor and then be left without anybody.
Because if you kill one German  a hundred people was hanged tomorrow or -- or shot tomorrow.
He would kill us before  so it cannot be true that we are liberated.
However we kind of for a while felt comfortable because they didn't kill all those Jews with the list and the Ukrainians were gone.
But we little by little we got used to this blood  but still it wasn't my  my genes to kill people.
He had to go all everything through and internship which we went through and...uh...he practiced for 10 years medicine in Chicago until...then he was retired for 1 and a half or 2 years and...uh...he had a heart condition  but that didn't kill him.
So my mind was to escape and let them kill me  but this cousin of mine start  you know  pushing me like coming out from a trance...my  myself...where I am.
I felt safe  but still I didn t think so far  because as I said at the beginning  I was afraid  or I -- I thought that the last day they will kill us all  they will throw a bomb  or -- or I dont know how [indecipherable] what way -- Right. --
Then all of a sudden I said to my husband  Abe  if the Nazis did not killed us  they they the bullets are going to kill us.
Well  it it didnt bother me  I I the only thing was I was wanted it to do  is to kill Germans  and my role was to destroy them.
To kill us all became your goal  though our flesh was dying  you can not -- you could not kill our soul.
So he came to -- to celebrate Passover with the Jews  but outside he was afraid that they going to denounce him  and hes going -- they going to kill him  because they killed a lot of Jews in -- in Poland after the war.
Some people were happy  uh huh  Jewish people in ghettos will kill you.
You know  go out and kill all the people who do bad things.
They kill mostly the Germans  but the -- but the Sondercommando were working  you know.
Because this is odorless and colorless  and uh it can kill you these gasses  uh carbon dioxide that kills you.
I found out after my brother was killed in combat that ther e was a group of the resistance that was lying in ambush for him one time  they wanted to kill h im.
Typhoid  dysenter y. The next day or a day after they came this Russian people with some help of the villagers that they recruited to do this work and they carried me to the hospita l where my hair was shaven from all over my body and I was dunked in DDT to kill all the lice and whatever  insects  and then I was unconscious for three days.
No  not particularly  as a ma tter of fact  I remember one in cident where this one Romanian officer was running throu gh the streets and yelling  \ I'm going to kill all the Jews.\
If you dont let me do this  youre going to kill him.
They would keep them three months  and after that  they will  each one wa s killed always  and before they would kill them  they would kill them  they would beat them terribly  and they  they died terrible deaths  so I really was just lucky that I had uh  the  for  I mean that I had the idea of  of running away  so and but then later on there was um  the blockeldest told us uh  ev entually that the selections were more often always  and um  and then  there was not anymore going to be any selections  they were just emptying the Auschwitz because the uh front  they were losing on the Russian front  and they were   get  the Russians were getting closer  so they would take uh some camps they would take on death marches  some they would take to the gas cham ber  some  and  and  some ways they  they  of course  didn't want that there should be any witne sses  so they were trying to kill them uh  in any way they designed.
They were the people with morals with consciousness and they wanted to help and to do do not kill.
One and the other one kill own people like Stalin 20 millions  and this part kill our people.
But also the Jews didn't knew nothing about it  but they should be saying that the Jews kill their own  that take no other Lithuanians to Siberia.
Maybe they arrested him and they told him  \ Look: if you don't say they kill you.\  -------
And they went in Slobotka  and then from house to house trying to kill many  many Jews  I don't how many thousands  just kill them  chase them out from the houses  took away their possession and there was no law at all.
After that I find out they already had graves digged in Tyrol to kill us all.
He had probably the ti he start to to kill me  he wanted  but I was going Crawling away.
And it was very danger -- the situation was not stable to reveal that I am Jewish  because in case the Russians retreat  the Germans come  then they -- Im exposed as a Jew  and they kill me.
And they were going from apartment to apartment  whoever were -- was in apartment  ta -- ta-taking the people out  and kill them on the spot  or -- or send them i-in for th-the concentration camp or other place  t -- t-to killed on the way to concentration camp.
He never realized that it was pa rt of the Nazi  I dont us e the word Nazi  as the Germans plan to kill the Jews.
If they kill me  I will not go in the wagons.ﬂ At day time  they took out...a day before  over 2 000 women.
They used to kill you if you didn't kept...didn't kept yourself clean.
So the Slovak government paid for another country to kill its own citizens just because they were Jewish.
You may have had somebody else but not me b ecause we would have been gone to the east and to the gas chambers l ike they started in 1941 to kill us.
And Stalin stop all army and not let him go help Warsaw because was very upset to Poland from beginning and let the German kill the Polish patriots.
We thought that they were going to kill us  you know  because people start to scream; so many people and then all of a sudden they let the shower go in Flossensburg.
So he says you can't be here because the Germans would see you here  they would kill us and you.
They didn't believe that the German would eventually kill all of them.
He took me there to kill me  and Page 13 I came back.
I mean  I couldn't -- no one can believe that people can be so vicious  so sadistic to kill people.
It wasnt -- during the Czechs  it wasnt too bad  but once the Czechs were ousted  and then the Ukrainians took over  and then the Hungarians  and that -- when the Hungarians took over  it got even worse.
And a guy came up to me and says  do you want to jump out of an airplane and kill Germans behind the lines?
And I told you already before in this story  that they send in somebody to kill us.
My -- my mother just made that decision  she said ge -- you kill yourself  I think -- or we will -- we will -- we will die out of sheer exhaustion  you know  or I dont know quite  you know  how its -- Right. --
I once had a can  a case of sardines I'd liberated so mewhere and gave it out to the inmates; that was my first reminder I mustn't do that because it would kill them  if they ate a can of sardines it would kill 'em.
So I said  \ How can I escape when I know that if I escape you will kill 10 others.
Second  if a Jew  they kill me -- they kill me one hundred per cent.
My father couldn't kill one of them for food because they were friendly little rabbits.
Uh I only noticed on my watch that exactly at four o'clock in th e afternoon this train left and was moving east  because I was familiar with the geography of Berl in and Germany  so we know we were were uh going to the east  and uh as a matte r of fact  uh since we were together with other other friends  in order to to not kill times but to somehow alleviate the situation within ourselves somehow started to sing Jewish songs we had uh learned uh uh in the in the youth movement. .
If to go to a Pollack  some on the way where I walk  they were going to kill me right away because there was bad people.
So I said  ﬁImagine if somebody would try to kill you  and there came some -- came a man  and they saved you.
But he was afraid that if he's going to take off  they're going to kill all his family.
The guy start crying  and he said  \ I'm not going to kill you.
And some of them have been only over there from those kapos what they -- they want to kill you practically on the spot.
We thought in masses is strength  and they cant kill hundred people at the same time.
I think that is of course our -- our problem  but if such a horror arrives to a -- to a people  and you see that something similar  and more cynical arrived in Cambodia when the -- the head of the state started to kill his own population  and -- and you -- we -- we see everywhere where we -- in hoot -- in Bu-Burundi   and the hoot -- Tutsies and Hutus and -- and the - Kosovo   and Formatted: Font: Bold Formatted: Font: Bold Interview with George Kadar 68 April 24  2000 whatever.
He said you're lucky  if not the wine  you wouldn't be here  the sardines would kill you.
They will kill all of us  and burn down the house.
He tried to speak with them such that made them -- ask he is German and they did not kill him.
And if th ey didn't move in formation the spears could penetrate  and kill them  and therefore it was very important that they moved as a unit  and I said that was very important.
First of all they knew that if the Germans got a hold of us they would do more  they would do worse than kill us  and secondly since they had already figured out where Heinz and my dad were were keeping their money  they could get paid instantly and not have to take any more risks with us.
They were so eager  they were so full of anxiety to kill you know.
So  they said  they  so  there was eight of them - they - they were antiSemitic  but they said  ﬁWe are not going to kill you  but what we are going to do–ﬂ They told them to undress.
And did they kill the Polish soldier  or -- no  thats different.
But it took -- it's a longer story than that because they used to take out people out of the prison camp  either kill them or get rid of them.
Used to take our peoples  they used to kill the people  they used to hang the people.
He wanted and so they brought them...and he started to kill them.
She was not afraid for me to tell me  but that he's going to kill her husband I don't think that she knew that.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 25 So the farmers that actually helped  dropped off the sacks of food from time to time came to us and said  ﬁI would recommend that you no longer come back here because they're going to kill you.
And we will kill a...uh...pig; and we will eat all winter pork and cabbage.
They werent ready to  he wasnt ready to kill him because he dropped his gun by my mom.
He wasn't an uncle anymore  but it was more a communal life and the people were getting together and we get...we had some more better privileges because of being Holocaust survivor from the Germans and things were already more livable and I had a room in a German villa and the lady was very nice to me and she been trying to...sometimes the Germans Germans were funny because they mostly  when you talk to them they would never kill anyone.
I predicted that open admission is going to kill the standards  the academic standards.
But its not a spy and not th e -- not the spy  they just wants to kill the Jews -- Jews -- the Jewish -- yeah.
To -- why dont othe r countries bombard this -- this hell  to kill us all  but that w-would be to save our misery.
It was my life really because if they kill others  they kill you.
They said they want to find out who is educated and kill them.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/CELIA YEWLOW page 3 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: dont remember.
He went home  and he kill his wife and child in the creek.
SL: You know  and the -- the -- the jealous boyfriend killed himself -- RL: He was afraid that the mob will kill him.
He saw my mother on the...felling on th e street and he wants to run and they already want him to kill so he couldn't and I saw him from far away wiping the tears.
They tu in Koldyczewo   you know  they didnt kill it in Horodyszcze   they brought them to Koldyczewo .
Gestapo will come and check and see if you are shaved or not  and if not  they will kill you. (
So  you know the people were so unprepared  so not having any kind of idea that they are going to take out 10 000 people to kill.
The partisans had absolutely no gumptions at all  they would just as soon  if they thought you were  if you were a collaborator  they'd kill you  or if they thought you were a collaborator  and if you turned them down when they knew that you had it  they figured that made you a collaborator as well  so the pa rtisans that were working that area used to give us indirect protection because my father and my uncle used to go out scavenging  if he went to a place that they didn't know him  they thought he was with the partisans  they'd be afraid  they'd barter with him a nd just get your stuff and get out  leave  and that's how we used to get our food.
If they kill me they kill me  but I'm not going to get off (crying).
Anyway  the mother  the researcher doctor said do not tell Dad that you are getting engaged  because it will kill him.
Every week they kill a -- so they started it  they wanted to have a independence.
But there were a lot of leftover Jews  let's say  who ran away from a small town who didn't go to a ghetto or one somebody who says well  he didn't think that they're going to kill his family.
And then they would bring other people and kill those people.
It 's going to be probably less than a year \  and she said  \ Ah  less than a year \  she said  \ No  they'll kill us first \  she said. \
And I took and we went to see ﬁMedea.ﬂ And I to this day  you know  there I was  I had no clue what this was all about  except that there was this mother who had ki was kill at the end kills those two children.
He wanted to kill me  he says  what did you do?
The people I remember boats came and and the patrian and they sank the boats  and so people got the well  some hundred people got kill ed in that thing  what th it was a lot of friction.
They were telling us all the time  \ No matter we win or loose  we kill you all.
Everybody was quiet  because they thought it was the intelligence to kill.
And if Soviet partisans  it's Communists  so again  so they felt themselves very strong in the ghetto even to be a Communist in this time was very dangerous for the Germans and for the Lithuanians because several times they were looking after such people in order to arrest them and to 33 kill them.
And they were Interview with Chasten Bowen April 26  2013 58circled day and night  and they said  light a building on fire  something  if anything they started to kill anybody or anything like that  and they would make an immediate attack on the camp.
We had another one  but...that Jews could kill somebody  anothe r Jew.
I learnt then that it wasnt only Jews who were put to death there.
I knew that they are the only ones what they can kill the Germans.
And some mother  from fright  used to kill their own children.
I think they are -- they are ready to kill all the Jews.ﬂ My father had a very tem-temper and he -- he nee - got so upset and he actually chased him out from the house.
As a Jew or communist in Dachau they send you to Auschwitz or kill you there.
Nobody will liv e. Run  because the Germans will kill everybody.ﬂ And the Germans caught this letter and I'm lucky  lucky it was a Wehrmacht  not SS  and this guy beat me up and beat up this girl and didn't gave the letter to the SS.
Another  Hitler didn't kill them all and this was in my mind in every place I turn around.
For example  they said  ﬁ Be zydﬂ not to kill the Jews  but hit the Jew  or there was a sign ﬁZyd to Pijawka ﬂ the Jew is a leach  or they used to say  ﬁZydy do Palestynyﬂ Jew  go to Palestine.
I am a Polish officer  and I cannot say that I am a Polish officer because...you see  he had some confidence in me because I had given him...I had preserved his nice stamps  and if he dared to say that he is a Polish officer  they would take him out and kill him.
That they could go down to such a level and to be so cruel and so systematically 42 and in so organized a way  to kill out so many people its beyond my human understanding.
They couldn't all like  like Czerniakow59 in Warsaw  kill themselves to end this all.
I  I don't re member with how many people I came  I think it was 1500 pe ople  and in  in 3 or 4 hours they could kill all these people from every transport.
I rather kill myself  because I told them  and they know  no old age home.
Uh-oh  there is the ch imneys and theres there is another place where they kill people.
for entirely different reasons  and I dont think the Holocaust connected.
It was very difficult  it was very difficult  it was very hard  and inside it builds up right away such a resentment  such a feeling of revenge  such anger  if I could just kill one.
They took them out at night and took care of them.
He could have killed Interview with Maria Devinki 34 him  but it's god's will for him not to kill hi m  because he could have all the things and kill him and forget about it.
A good Polish guy would say like this  I'm not going to kill a Jew.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/CELIA YEWLOW page 14 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: have  we had a feeling that it cannot be.
Foolishly he went to the German Embassy in Paris with a gun  tried to kill the German Ambassador or threatened him or whatever.
So now  in the last months of the -- of the war  you know  they suddenly said  we dont need only racial homogeneity  we need only political homogeneity  and started to kill everybody in this time  10 thousands of Germans  either  you know.
So  in any condition  any pretext they have to kill  they did.
So I came to them and I told them  ﬁListen  I am a Jew.
I said  \ Well  then  why do you want to kill people whom you never even met.\
I was fraid to say German woman because he could kill 19 me and  you know  this way he has witnesses that somebody is dead  that I was told my father... told me what to say.
We didn't realize or believe that the Germans will come and kill us  and uh  we hoped that uh  that's going to be our destiny until the uh  all the things  until everything can be over.
Okay - can you tell me now a little bit about when the Germans came  when they first got to your town  when it was and - In 1939 when the Germans came in nobody was too much fri ghtened because some people remembered the Germans from other wars  like pare nts and grandparents and nobody was so afraid of them  but once they came in an d they start looking for Jews an d catching one or catching a few and take them out of town and kill them and they took people to other towns just fo r work.
you know  walking someplace  so it was very stupid of me that I did it what I did  because I I went to them and I tell them about this  that so and so date you should run away  because they come to kill you.
And/or else is always we'll give you to the Germans and you'll be dead.
When they had somebody that they wanted to hang or kill  they had it in their own private execution room.
He says to kill the Jew  so we save them.ﬂ But in Poland  was different.
Sabotage was the ultimat e thing is to kill the person  but to my good fortune  the man who would have the sport to do the killing has left  he was a very high-ranking officer  he left  it was already 11 or 12  and he left I think at 9 o clock.
And I drowned their house and I tried to kill the dog.
They saw these atrocities that were going on against the Jews but they didn't want to leave.
There was a group called NSZ which is an abbreviation Narodowe Sily Zbrojne  they would kill you off right away if they discovered that you were Jewish  and they did.
And  some of them survived and some of them they were given by informers to police and Gestapo and they were kill ed.
And here I know already the Germans: if I say a word to anybody of our camp--it is all...all primitive people--that we have an epidemic of typhoid and para-typhoid  the Gestapo will come and will kill us all.
And if th ey were only wounded  you know  the cold would kill them in a few hours  because once you don't move and you stay th ere wounded  you had no chance to survive and there wouldn't be any Poles to come to help you  that I know of.
And then they said  do not eat that stuff because its gonna kill you.
But I...I was thinking a Jew even with shaking hands  but he will not kill me or the baby.
I remember that my father and neighbors did kill a pig together  sl aughtered it and divided it.
Because if they find out  the villagers  that if I kept a Jew  they'll kill me.\
Yeah  that  supposedly that doctor that I was seeing  but it was not and  and the funny thing  one recollection I have  because by that time I was getting paranoid too  I mean everybody was out to get me and I remember when I was going for these in the hospital  one doctor came up to me and said to me  \ I hear that you're a holoc aust survivor\  and I imagined that he said it as a  in an accusing way  you know and I kind of just pulled back and didn't say anything and I don't know why he said that  guess he was trying to probably find out whether that had anything  get me to talk  b ut I clammed up and  because I was so paranoid  I thought  \ Oh this man is  you know  he's going to kill me  he's like Hitler.\
Well  when we were with the partisans  we didnt hear either you know  from the Russian side.
And those blacks who beli eve in that are just as evil because theyre perpetrating  theyre perpetrating that what makes them possible to kill and murder.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0002 31 31Im born Jew  so they want to kill me  thats all.
The one lady who the Nazis beat them up and kill them  and she and her mother and a son  they live in Theresienstadt.
What do you remember about when the Germans first came into your town?
They tried to kill mine -- they founded out afte r a while -- because I send them money.
Greater Palestine  and that was can assa ssinate those Jews  and after having suffered what I have suffered  et cetera  kill a fellow Jew?
If you will shoot me  please kill me with one bullet.
And remember I don't have any...I don't have to have a reason to kill you  if I want it.
If they had begun to kill us or killed us totally  which they could have done  they would not have been able to get this.
Now since...we we didn't know a ll the details but we knew that the American army had penetrated Germany uh uh deeply and that the Russians uh had had uh at least uh reached the uh the uh River  so the questi on again came up  what's going to happen and since we didn't know by whom wo uld...we thought that the the Na zis now had enough of us and what would either kill us or or l eave us alone  but no.
And they were going to kill him and a whole bunch of people that they were going to kill.
In fact  I found out then  the German prisoners of war could go in places where they couldnt  when they were fighting for the United States.
And you know  I had no remorse on those women that used to I used to hear in the train station that they are going to kill the Russian  they are going to kni fe them to death or theyre gonna put boiling waters on them.
And told him he should kneel in front of the dog and he should say  let's see  like Herr  Herr is Mister  you know  like Mr. Klein or Mr. Dog  you know  Mr. Dog an-and beg forgiveness and beg apology and apologize to him  kneeling and -- and prostrate yourself and -- and then beat him  beat him so badly with -- with th-that  that people had to carry him in  but they didn't kill him.
We ha d opportunities to you know kill the Germans but the repercussions would be so  so great that it you know that only the unarmed civilian population would be suffering.
Or its like in my story  I might have said some that we had lice and we would spend hours trying to get rid of the lice.
That Tadek will take us Tuesday and that the janitor  either he wanted to kill me I did not realize th at he wanted to rape me that he wanted to kill me.
We were -- and we were crying because the Germans by them pick  pi ck  pick  and they kill us.
We had guns  we had nine millimeter Mauser  and we had them at the ready  because we didnt know if the men would have been tortured to reveal the place that the USHMM Archives RG -50.549.02*0051 8 Germans would -- might come and -- and ser -- I had pretty well decided then that -- that if they would come  that I would defend myself  I would -- I would try to kill  and be killed  probably  in a short gunfight.
How can a human  normal human being say that we from blood to make matzo and thing we kill that we evenŠ What was it?
A nd I told him  'You will stop here and let me out  or you will kill me.
They lost the war because the Germans took a part and this took a part  but they wanted to kill us  the Jews.
One thing for sure  though  if you weren't killed in the factory  the Germans weren't going to kill you.
Go take a stick and kill a German  take his gun or his rifle and come to us.
She told me  \ Toby  you're gonna kill me cause they're gonna kill you.
They used to go out  the people used to go out  take knives  cut off pieces of meat from the horses  from the dead horses outside.
We cannot sit home because they come in  they kill you.
They put me under the gallows and they said to her  we won't touch you  but tell us is this a Jewish child?
Because then was the concentration in Szydlowiec  to kill these people  to kill out already.
And when I said to my mother that even if she'll kill me  I'm not going back to the woman  she had no choice.
Even to die when they wanted to  you couldn't kill yourself... Well  they could.
And over there there would be some people which will... which will kill them.
But they were planning to kill us and take our money and Chaim say  \ Selma  jump!\
Who could think that they would kill women and children  or old people  or Rabbis  or respected business people or anything?
So if you are out after 7 o'clock or 8 o'clock  they kill you.
We heard later that they did kill most of the people because we know somebody that came out from under the dead  but I don't know if you want to hear this now or shall I go into this later.
The then we heard  when the Poles landed in Holland  you know the Polish parachuters  whole brigade and couple American brigades landed in Holland  we heard those rumors and it was the gospel truth of course  you could not I mean  if you said  ﬁNo  its not true ﬂ somebody could kill you  probably.
The Jews are still going to work in the Third Reich and maybe they are not going to kill the people in the Jews in the Third Reich.
Some hit people  I saw ‚em kill people  I saw ‚em kill babies and– for no reason.
You broke the bag cement and you sabotage  so he jumped on top of me  and with his heel he was trying to kill me  knocked me down and uh and hit me and made me a mess  I was laying there  my whole bloody  bloody mess  my face  my body  and he walked away  my father wa s standing next to me  he couldn't help me  he couldn't help with nothing.
They killed  they we kill and thats thats the way it goes.
The Cuza party came up for one day and get permission to...uh rob and kill Jews.
Well  I wonder if it had anything to do with th e fact that the people on trial for trying to kill Hitler were not the defendants in the dock at Nuremberg.
A. Yes  we did not kill them but we stopped the British  stop the trains.
What do you want to take so many people and kill them at the same time?ﬂ You know?
They're taking us out of the camp  and they're going to kill us!\
He says okay then we take you but if you show me any ignorance to ha ndling the equipment I will kill you personally he says.
So that was just a motive to go and kill and deport the Jews.
It -- The whole thing  it was such a humiliating experience  to be chased  to be -- to be at the target of somebody who wants to kill you because why?
Otherwise  you know  the Germans would complain  and the guard would kill.
I going to say they kill the oldest people  maybe they going to do something  but the young babies  the old men -- I had an uncle he was over 100 years.
But they were also blowing up bridges  and shooting German soldie rs  and with the Vietnam experience fresh  and the parallel often drawn by our own attorneys  some of whom had served in Vietnam  and certainly drawn by judges who had handled civil cases involving problems dealing with Vietnam  this was obviously an issue that we were nt going to able to win a case  even if the Communist happened to be a Jew  and the -- and the Communis t Jew blew up a bridge  that an army occupying a country  unfortunately it has the right to kill people who are blowing up bridges.
L: {Well  when he came down to the basement  I thought he came down to kill me}.
Actually took them there to kill to kill everybody  8 000 people in my town   my 5 mother  my father  my uncles  my sister  my brother  everybody.
And my wife said  you know the Germans tried five years to kill him and they didnt succeed.
When she came to Auschwitz  the first thing she wa-wanted to do was she ran to the electric wire  hoping to get -- electrocute herself  or on the way there  with the guards watching this and they would shoot at her and kill her.
And I said to her  \ Margot  I'm positive they won't do it because if they wanted to kill us  why transport us to Brinwitz  bring us here  and I'm sure they won't do it.\
The fact that there are lots of Serbs living or people of Serb descent living in Chicago   they assumed they wouldnt like when they hear about this  but there was no particular interest in going to Chicago to kill people of Serb background.
So I was th inking my father will go with the beard  with this  they will kill him.
Pause) When she said the word amho to me  I said  \ Please  don't come here anymore because they're going to kill you.\
Maybe they know something that I don't know but I didn't kill six million people.
Ther e was a Biblical phrase that was used \ Thou shalt not kill the victims and steal their property and get away with it.\
And later after this -- thats a very big -- very big noose and in London  in Paris was talking about this because this guy did very bad reputation in Czechoslovakia and kill thousand people.
Wherever they could find a Jew  they used to kill a Jew.
Their only purpose was to kill Jews and communists  and that's when the first massacre occurred in Ponary  in a place near Vilna.
Yeah  I just told you  I told th em right away  why do you hide us  they're going to put you in jail or they kill you  oh no  n o. Their hate was so big against the Germans that they would do anything  anything to  oh yeah  on the street   between '39 and '40  they're all se nt in the wrong directions  the Germans  so one German said to the other in German  be careful  they send us the wrong way.
And ask our people if -- I mean  the people who was go int -- in camp  if you have something and you 106 supposed to do right or kill fellow who did so mething wrong for you  you can have the rifle  you can kill.
There are a lot of i-in the forest and they can kill you  because they are the ones which are afraid now To come back.
It was a week before Rosh Hashannah  in 1942  when they decided to kill the Jewish population in this the Ukraine  so they surrounded the town with Ukrainian police.
But this was when the first  that the first should you know kill -- because and also  so my brother had to report because they all knew their players were the reservists .
So he had gone to this house  and I thought he was going to kill this guy.
I couldnt understand how come -- I just couldnt understand how come God let kill so many innocen t people.
What am I going to tell them I'm German  they  they  they take a pitchfork and kill me because they hated the Bosch  they hate d the  the Germans.
Why the German Ges SS didnt kill him  I dont have an idea.
And what they decided to have a kind of a mutiny  kill their guards  but then turn the camp over to us.
They make you first write a letter that you crossed nicely  to lure everyone  and later they rob you and they kill you.
Marcel Drimer: Well  you know  we were afraid that -- this was getting absolutely impossible because we couldn't be there forever  plus  we all thought that the war is coming to an end and that the Germans would kill everybody.
Just as I blame  just as I will put the blame of the people who kill each other in Burundi  Rw anda  Yugoslavia.
So he said to all the people  a Polack wants to kill three Russian girls.
And it is the biggest honor to find one  and if you want to kill them yourself  its o.k.
The Germans always told them if they tried to escape  they would kill her.
If you want to kill my daughter  the bullet has to go through me.\
So  one day  when I found out what was going on and I had a threat that they're trying to kill me so I went to the mayor of the town and I found out that he was one of the teachers that I used to go to school in my last years.
So many times that I wanted to die  I think that dying  it is the way to die  I was afraid of the way in which they ll kill me.
At that point my mother said  ﬁIf you have to split me from my children  you might as well kill me.ﬂ My mother and father  other older people  and yo ung children  were in another line and that same night they were gassed and died.
When the war broke out people started to talk what was going on in German that Hitler came to power and he wants to -- not to kill the Jews that the Jews had to flee Germany or that they were not able to be educated.
And she screamed once he was trying to kill her  so she al ways -- as long as she knew that he was holding onto the back of the bike it was fine.
But  in a certain sense  as \ we \  we shouldn't kill them.
Although here and there they would kill a Jew or beat up...my brother was beaten up  my father was beaten up  but it was not so bad.
One of the soldiers  they were both pretty drunk  points his automatic gun at him and says  you're Jewish  I'm going to kill you.
One day in this ghetto there was a man  a butcher too  he was killing the cattles so he say  ﬁyou know  I going to give youﬂ -- I remember very  very  well  ﬁ25 zlotys.ﬂ It was very  very  much money -- ﬁwhen you bring me my knife.ﬂ You know  the man have a special knife to kill.
Thank God  they didn't kill him then He wrote he some...uh...letters  you know  and I wrote him back.
So the German himself had an interest in the Kovno ghetto operation because it killed the people from the small towns  a kill with nothing left over there.
They took us at night to some house  and we were thinking again that they were going to kill us.
The parents will stay and look how they kill the children.
But when we came back we noticed because it was September when the war broke out and then there was the holidays so we couldnt go to pray because they would come and kill the people.
An American soldier gave me his gun  he said  \ Kill him.\
And unfortunately  these two guys changed cars  and Leist was the in the Fishers car  and Leist just hit the floor  and when the car arrived in the city hall  he called my father downstairs and he said  look how Ive been for for all the good things which I have done for the pole Warsaw population  and they are trying to kill me.
He said  what are you bringing me there  they Interview with Esia Shor February 22  2010 28should kill me like a dog and leave me in the woods?
I says  ﬁYou know they're going to kill us again.ﬂ The whole nights  all these years I have dreams.
The other recreation was that -- that when I -- when they caught me with a bread  I-I was beaten up so badly that they broke  you know  a big spoon that y-you -- you are cooking for the whole army th -- and that I thought that they are going to kill me with it  but how I survived it is just really by miracle.ﬂ I said  ﬁIsn't that enough recreation for you?ﬂ And then the teacher  the other teacher came in and said  ﬁMrs.
Foolishly  he took a gun  entered the German Embassy in Paris and shot the secretary there.
He was some kind of boss in the -- they got a special -- a sp ecial business in Russia  when they have to prepare meat -- how prepare  they have to buy something  this animals  cow or some -- something  and make -- put them somewhere to k -- to kill them and have meat.
We couldnt believe theyre going to -- ready to kill the Jews.
They're going to kill me  I'm not going to let them kill me.
And then once in a while we'd kill a goose or something and render its fat and put the goose into the fat  you know.
