They knew I was Jewish and they knew they are Jewish.
I didn't know this but I find when I went to Australia to visit my cousi n  I find a lot of people from Warsaw and that synagogue and that Saturday I was invited to be at the bar mitzvah.
And we had synagogue who caught fire and you know  because these were old barracks  they were dried pieces of wood put together  huts really.
I made them -- I -- I was principal speaker at -- my synagogue did a Holocaust Memorial Garden  and a couple of -- couple of state senators were there and so on  and I gave this little speech.
Behnker told...said to me when he went out from th e synagogue  he says he understands me why I didn't...why I couldn't go in.
Uh...I...I remember vividly that I w oke up and the Kristallnacht was on the ninth of November...uh...and I got up in the morning and it was about 6:30 in the morning because I had to walk to school which was a little bit of a distance from where we used to live and...uh...but the school was situated with the...uh...synagogue in back of the building  a very big synagogue and...uh...I came...I left my house to go to school and...uh...I seen how the SR was...uh...destroying Jewish...uh...stores and Jewish apartments by...uh...breaking the glass and throwing the furniture and...uh...all be...belongings out on the street for destruction  just setting it afire or people just grabbing it and walking away with it.
There had actually been a school at the synagogue at the Temple and thats why you left?
No  we did not -- we -- we did not go to synagogue because I -- one of the synagogues was a very small place where we went to  and that one was -- was demolished  totally demolished.
Peculiarly enough  even so that we belonged then to a reformed synagogue  the religious instruction that I received was Conservative Judaism -- th e reform synagogue did not have any religious school.
Did you notice I mean  since many of the churches were interspersed with where the synagogue was  where the narrow streets in the old town were  where there were Jewish peddlers in places.
And one Saturday  Im kemming coming in in my room where I dress  where I I I keep my things in the synagogue.
And he loved going to synagogue with us and to brotherhood.
And one day  th is was  I must have been about eleven or so  I went to a butcher shop  got a huge ham hock and got out and when the people went to the synagogue Friday night  I was eating it without a hat and pretty soon they were repo rting it to her and they were coming and that was my last visit.
I -- one of my early memories when we were liberated was going to synagogue with my Uncle Zelig  the one who allegedly tried to choke me.
And during the high holidays my father would go to synagogue with a top hat on.
And here in Washington at least they have a chance to see by the way in Auschwitz I also went to a place where they opened up a synagogue and its a huge synagogue.
My great grand uncle was...uh...Rabbi Meisels who has a synagogue named ... uh...after him in Prague and on my father's side I have Rabbi Dovelando   who was very famous too  who has another synagogue named...uh...after him.
It -- perhaps that was the way German Jews  who had lived in Germany for such -- and I dont mean that in any demeaning way  had integrated so much that they did not view themselves so much as Jewish as they viewed themselves as Germans of a Jewish religion  i-if you understand  actually.
You know  there was no -- no synagogue -- nothing of that kind and th ey were held in secret.
As a matter of fact I received a cer tificate from my teacher  uh Jewish teacher  only Jews were taught by Jews  and it said in there this letter is instead of certificate because the certificate was destroyed by fire   which was the fire in the synagogue  and uh  this man by the way is still living in New York  my old head teacher from the Jewish school and he is 87 years old today and I'm still in touch with him.
They thought that Kol Nidre night they didnt realize that Kol Nidre was the eve before Yom Kippur  and they knew that the Jews are going to be congregated on Yom Kippur in the synagogue.
Our lives were mainly revolved around the synagogue  the central synagogue of Sofia  to which we went more often than ever before.
Or I was standing in the courtyard when they were dynamiting the synagogue.
And did you belong did your family belong to a synagogue?
During this time  did you continue to observe Jewish holidays  the Sabbath?
Oh yes  to th about 20 years I been talking to schools  synagogue  churches  all kinds of the everywhere.
A2: Well  not the ca when we went to the ceremony  to dedicate the reopening of the synagogue in Fulda I dont know if you remember that  there was it was there was an open street  and they they had they had a you know  si I dont know if it was buses  or cement trucks  but they had they had obstacles closing off the street  to make sure that th you know  if you looked it was subtle  but if you looked carefully  the level of security was Interview with Dorothea Fingerhood April 27  2017 98 It was there.
We had Jewish friends and we did go to synagogue  so there were some Jewish people there  but I dont know whether -- the extent of it.
Now  I wish they followed the teaching of the present Pope  Pole  who went to the synagogue in Rome  and who claims  rightly so  that actually the Jews contributed a lot to Christianity.
Um – my last memories of Berlin uh .. were that  as we were leaving the synagogue  my – the principal of my – of the high school that I had gone to was standing at the exit point and gave each person a hard candy and he said goodbye to me and I was surprised that he remembered me and then we were put on a truck -- an open truck and the last sight that I remember of Ber lin is that victory column th at site in the middle of the Tiergarten  its just a monument -- nothi ng really special -- I believe it remembers -- it commemorates a victory in the wa r of 1870-71 against the French.
We didnt do anything on Saturday  just go to the synagogue  and we came home  and then when was a nice weather  like summer  I used to go with my brother  we used to go and play soccer to a special place where we used to meet with our friends  and we used to play and then we came home  and we eat.
Was there any type of a Jewish council in this community?
But anyway  we left the big synagogue where our oldest son had been.
And I wondered whether or not it was your early early background  early exposure to the synagogue  to faith  to what was it?
I went to synagogue one day  and in that same time a friend wh ere I was working  she had a big cross all the time.
And his job was was  so I said  as a teacher  he was teaching Jewish subjects to Jewish people in the public schools.
And that same synagogue today has just one wall left  but theyre picking up the pieces and trying to reconstruct whatever they can of the synagogue the way the original synagogue was.
And I think my -- my father had a very bad reaction against his father  who reg -- who went regularly to the synagogue  and on -- and on the same time  a man who -- who was quite brutal and tasteless.
So it came the day  May 4  family by family they took all of us in the synagogue .
And I continued to be quite active in the community  includi ng  of course  the synagogue  president of the synagogue and every Jewish organization.
What about your pa rents  were they involved [indecipherable] They were involved in the synagogue and I was -- and I sang as a boy in the choir of the biggest synagogue in Berlin  located in the Oranienburger Strasse.
You know  attended regularly all the holidays in the synagogue and preparing shabbas as it should be  and you know  just being a typical  not quite orthodox but very traditional.
I do not remember   but I know there was a big party afterwards  at that synagogue  and it was a a day of celebration  but what we did  I do not remember  but it was probably the most enjoyable time in our lives  from the day I can remember.
So on the same place where the a st beautiful  in the center of the city  next to the big theater  and t-to city hall  actually  behind the corner  there will be built a new a li a new  big library  but the main part will be a beautiful  nice synagogue.
Did you become more Jewish because of what you went through?
Do you think a place like a Holocaust museum has a purpose?
And when I did go  I just coul dn't believe that people spoke English in a synagogue  because in my village they all spoke only he -- [indecipherable] only in Hebrew  and there wasnt any foreign words spoken except Hebrew.
We  the town we lived in before the war had a synagogue  had Jewish life after the war  152 in the Jewish M useum in Amsterdam.
And my father would have loved to go to synagogue Saturdays  but it was his best day.
Okay  this is the synagogue which this is what it looked like in 1970 when I made my first trip back to Czechoslovakia.
We li -- we did observe all the Jewish holiday s. Not all  I mean the major holidays.
Back in the place where I was once  where I lived it was above the synagogue.
We moved in the synagogue and then shortly after they destroyed the synagogue.
They tore everything out from the synagogue  and kept the horses in there.
I mean  Jews lived in other towns in that area  too.
But it took some years to say the least before we were allo wed to build a synagogue.
It was vandalized but not destroyed  so we had already the first services which was an emotio nal experience of a special kind and and and we had org ...since in other words and the the uh community build ing next to the synagogue was not destroyed  so we had already st arted to try to organize some kind of a new Jewish community  because there were two  thre e or four Jews married to non-Jewesses who had been saved  and you know about th e community and so  so they all wanted to know what could they achieve.
But it was a large  either a large synagogue or a large school.
Ma -- there was never any prejudice in my family -- I remember even my grandfather -- now I remember that they had probably some Jewish friends  from the names that they -- vaguely I remember  but one more -- one th ing really Im very happy of  that in Trieste we have the most beautiful synagogue  beautiful  and I dont know how it was not touched.
He didnt char-charge my aunt for it because she couldnt afford it  and and we had a wonderful Bar Mitzvah with a synagogue full of people   and they made a small party for me afterwards.
A little town called Buchau  it is the only town in Germany where a synagogue had a bell  a ringing bell like a church.
And we were there for a Shabbat prayer at the Remu Synagogue which I mentioned before.
We never was suppose to go to synagogue until you're married so I never 8 went to synagogue because when I married  the war was on and Ive never gone to a synagogue.
And uh...the reason our synagogue was started originally of...by my great grandfather or grandfather was that he didn't think that the big synagogue--they have a beautiful  large synagogue in Copenhagen- but that wasn't Orthodox enough hundred years ago.
It was so many people I remember when the synagogue was burning when we were coming out  there was a whole crowd there standing there and cheering and they were throwing things.
For example  when -- when -- when there were wars of -- I used to teach the Hebrew language in that synagogue to kids.
And then I was Confirmed and I went on and stayed in -- I-I was -- I sang in the choir in the synagogue and then I stayed on and did two more years of what was called post-Confirmation class.
So I guess I was lucky that we had children right away  and -- and that brings you in contact with your surroundings  and then somehow you make frie nds  and you get acquaintances  and when my kids were little  I met somebody in the synagogue  who said  ﬁOh  you cant stay home all day long ﬂ So she dragged me to -- to one of the meetings of -- one of organizations and thats how I started  you know  getting part of the community.
They took all the people in the synagogue  you know a lot of the kids  they got shot inside.
We belong to a neighborhood synagogue and Max is currently studying for his Bar Mitzvah which is going to be in February of the year 2002.
And I was telling my daughter-in-law  do you know  I -- in the middle of all these celebrations and its so wonderful  see Jewish life continuing an-and ju -- my cousins parents were survivors and its wonderful  but Im standing there and all I can picture -- and this is a picture that Ive studied from medieval times even  and they herded Jews into the synagogue and then set them afire.
He was really not very interested in  not only in the Jewish religion  but on any religion.
What and it went on for a couple of months  but what really broke things is that in March was my Yahrzeit   and my fiancee and I had decided to go to the next town  which had a little  small synagogue.
And every Saturday they went to the synagogue and then they came to us and they were singing after lunch those songs that you are supposed to.
You know  its not existing memorial in the street  it that the th-the synagogue was there Was there  yeah.
I -- I had -- I wanted to see the synagogue  which is a -- a beautiful  historical building.
And that's when my grandfather started his own synagogue  so to speak.
At this place stood a -- stood a synagogue  and thats was Teplice.
But it ceased to exist as a synagogue  but for the years my father was there  35 years  it was.
Bu t they had the means to build a church of themselves and they built it right across from the Portuguese   the Spanish we call Po rtuguese Synagogue.
And they brought in the Orthodox rabbi  and tied him up to the roof of the wooden synagogue  and started a fire  and made the elders run in to try to save him  and they all died right in front of my eyes.
But its an old medieval town  small town square  and there was a at the one end was a big cathedral  and right off the center was a wooden synagogue.
We had a record of one of the 29 famous cantors home so I have heard I don't think I ever went to services  because this was such an Orthodox synagogue  so I couldn't go maybe when I was little kid they took me  Grandfather took me  but I never went.
They had -- they were not allowed to go to school at all unless you had a Jewish school you could go to.
I lived in the city  not far away from where the synagogue is in Rome  yes.
I go in Hebrew; you know  the rabbi used to co me to our house and teach us Hebrew and prepare for the bat mitzvah.
Synagogue was downstairs  and upstairs was -- And  I mean   there may be -- have been some people where the kids were out grown already or they didn't have any children.
But there is somethings I learned some things  prayers  you know  and but until today I was not very comfortable being in a Synagogue because I didn't grow up in that kind of surroundings you know.
Weve only burned one synagogue since last August.ﬂ This is what was happening.
But it alwa ys struck me and it always stayed with Interview with George Pick November 13  1997 39me  that despite of the fact that my father was I dont think he had gone into a synagogue a half a dozen times in his last 20 years of his life  he still would refuse to do this  and that he was very much of a a a Jew.
About Judaism  I told them -- we were not exactly a religious  more traditional Jews.
And kitty corner from us across the street was the  a Jewish synagogue  which is now by the way the Jewish Community Center.
And um  I still remember the procession leaving the flat of my grandparents  my grandfather  had take n the route towards the synagogue it must have been about one kilometer and in front of this procession were two policemen riding on horseback   to keep order and then came the w hole  you know  Orthodox Jewish community with the hasaan  you know  the church singer in front singing all kind of very sad Jewish  Hebrew songs  I'm sure prayers.
I dont want to talk to anybody and were going to go just to see the place and show the children where my house was  the cemeter y  the school and synagogue and so on -- which doesnt exist any more.
I haven't set foot in the Synagogue  oh yes  last  the first time in 50 years.
Now let me go back to 7 the synagogue in Schwandorf So the first Hanukkah light I thought I'd spend it with the Jews in Schwandorf.
It was everything because we could find there everything what belongs to the Jewish life  from our synagogue to our school in Hebrew or Yiddish  till many universal things like cinemas and so on and so on.
I went to the synagogue on Friday night  or on Saturday morning  I dont remember.
And if I mean  if they unless they were dressed differently  or went to s if they I dont remember seeing a synagogue.
Uh the ghetto was around the synagogue courtyards because that was the concentration of Jews and along the street so that it had some sort of division  dividing line  and the houses on our side of the street  all of them had uh enclosed courtyards to the street  so it was easy to close off that particular part  so in the warehouse uh there was a double wall.
So it was a -- it was a -- really a Jewish -- I was Bar Mitzvahed when I was  you know  13.
The Jewish community was centered around the school  which was a parochial school  and the synagogue.
Well  I went to a parochial school  of which of the Jewish community.
I don't know why she went to the synagogue  and she found some prayer books  and she brought it to us.
Well  we celebrated  of course  all the religious holidays in a very extensive way.
From there  i the Jewish doctor gave me a note  he says  go to Augsburg   theres one Jewish synagogue left in all Augsburg   that to show for the world that Hitler wasnt so bad  he left one synago gue  he left in thik in in thing.
And I was immediately -- I noticed that the fire brigade  the fire hoses were in this direction  one house  another house  in between was the burn -- burning synagogue  and outside later the -- the -- the si-silver items and the Torah scrolls which they had taken apart and trampled on by Hitler Youth and SR.
That was a--a suburb where mostly Jewish people live in it.
Before I go into the after war story  Id like to talk about the burning of the synagogue.
And I really never made much of an effort to sort of identify the local synagogue if there was one.
And the synagogue was still standing and there was the Jewish school where we eventually went because there was a Jewish center  a magnificent gothic cathedral  I mean like -- a -- a synagogue  excuse me .
Well  you know  there is a Jewish community in Germany again.
She goes away and I go in the street and I go to this big building where she shows me the synagogue and I see it's full of soldiers there.
The -- The rabbi who said in the synagogue in 43  was the other -- that was Marcus Melchior  and his -- hi -- that he wrote  ﬁThat was a Golden Heart ﬂ when he returned.
I cant [communicate] in a crowded synagogue  if you will  where everythings regimented  every step is practiced.
And we had to walk there to the synagogue  which was about 35 to 40 minutes walk.
Did you get did you go to synagogue  did you get religious instruction?
>> Fritz Gluckstein: Well  my bar mitzvah  it was a big synagogue  of course.
We -- my parents joined BNai Israel synagogue and -- which is a Conservative synagogue  and they did no t -- she did not keep kosher any more  because she didn't have the money for two se ts of dishes  or the kosher meat.
And so I made the arrangements to find a new ho me  or new digs with se -- with those factors in mind of having to go to -- to th e tutorial college every day  a-and obviously I still wanted to be near a synagogue and all that  and I had to live kosher.
Our headquarters was on Second Avenue  around Eleventh Street  149 Second Avenue  and there was a right nearby  a little sort of a synagogue which a where students could study the   and I went there in order to say kaddish for my father  and I come in and the Rabbi said  I said to the Rabbi  ﬁCan you please help me?
The feeling there in those days was that now that I am among my own people  why should I go to synagogue.
There was a large Jewish community there  I gather  but -- There was a large Jewish community there.
And the reason he brought us back is because he wanted to destroy the ghetto  because they didnt want to leave anyt hing that was Jewish  so we lived in the synagogue and made the camp and every day went out and we destroyed house by house.
They moved to a different house  not anymore in the synagogue  in the community house.
I started -- I started out that there was a -- a teacher in that small synagogue there in the suburb.
They -- they seemed to feel that th -- were Jewish.
And all this happened in the social hall of the synagogue  which was pretty much in the downtown area of Ratibor  and Ratibor was a pretty little town  not far from the Interview with Renate Fischer Chernoff June 23  2005 27synagogue for example  was the marketplace.
Was the whole building -- Was -- was the -- was the -- it was still smoking  and there was very little left of the synagogue. [
There was one -- this was the main synagogue  and then there was another little synagog ue called Klaus  and that was for those who were super  super Orthodox.
And we were informed in the synagogue on Rosh Hashanah  the first day of Rosh Hashanah  we were informed that nobody should go home because the Germans are going to round you up the night between the 1st and the 2nd of October.
The only one is a story that my mom told me and that sort of became an indication of my early rebellion and that was at some point durin g these --right either at the beginning of the war or the pre-war period my grandfat her was beaten up on the way back from synagogue or threatened or harassed and he I think people were pulling at his beard and he hid his beard in his coat.
It was a beautifu l synagogue - painted  the ceiling was painted with all ten commandments and all the paintings  and angels.
We sent them to school that they should have knowledge about Judaism but we should go every Saturday to synagogue  we did not.
I still remember the Schloss  or the palace that we used to go to that was in the park and every Sabbath afternoon we would uh just walk around this since we were orthodox  so one of the things you did  in the morning you would go to synagogue  in the afternoon you would go to the park.
I never  lets say when I went to work on Saturdays  and I saw people going to to synagogue  and I [indecipherable] that I used to smoke.
If you see  you can find consolation the synagogue too  but I guess she di dnt know enough to know that.
You know  when I went here to a synagogue and I didnt see people outside sneering or -- or -- I -- I -- I knew that right away.
If you look at the ruins of the Interview with Guido Calabresi July 27  2017 10 Spanish synagogue  you see signs of donations by Calabresi because they treated us so well  when we were in their territory.
And after the war I did go to synagogue  but we never kept kosher or anything like that.
In a synagogue called [indecipherable] in the Oranienburger Strasse [indecipherable] existed  was bombed by the allies and I had joined a choir in that particular synagogue.
And our we had a nice dinner at home after that  and I said the table prayer  you know  tish kabaid afterwards and made Ki ddush  and of course  in in synagogue  I I read the Torah and you know  it was very traditional.
They  I guess were Jews by religion on ly  or th-they the Germans so nicely put it  Jewish citizens of a Hebrew faith or pe rsuasion.
But yes  of course  we went to visit them in the synagogue.
Speaking of being in the Protestant section  was your family religiously Jewish?
But a lot went on in the synagogue because of the social hall.
We were passing the street where the synagogue is  I jumped off the bus at that station and after work I went to the synagogue.
We had a synagogue in there  we were blocked off  and a tomatorah.
Im more conscious of being a Jew  and -- although I still dont belong to any temple or synagogue.
So that's just the kind of input  and when I came here  for instance  that 51 synagogue  they didn't have a certain class  so I instituted a class there.
He gave speeches  he was the president of a synagogue and [indecipherable] .
Finally  slowly we started to leave the train and to go towards the synagogue.
Its called the syna ﬁSynagogue of Laudenbach .ﬂ ﬁI walked in a dream  past the empty lot  where once stood the simple  one story synagogue  victim of the flames of Kristallnacht .
The commuter train was an elevated train and it passed by the synagogue where I had my bar mitzvah and what I saw there wa s really one of the worst horror shocks in my life.
In the beginning we was going to a Hebrew school  so it was only Jewish people  you know  and they teach us with everybody.
There was no Torah left in Liegnitz because the synagogue got burned.
There were a lot of children in the tenement constantly horsing around and nobody  nobody was constantly bothering me and  and  and disciplining me and get ting ahead or going to the synagogue  nothing.
Did you ever do you recall going to the synagogue or performing any No.
The community sold th e real estate where the synagogue was standing on  because they needed that money to feed the families who no longer could make a living.
You know  they don't keep a koshe r house  but she goes to synagogue regularly.
Moise Weiner: On the holidays  mostly  because you see the synagogue was destroyed in 1936 or 37.
And in fact  I came across a letter just the other day  the head of the synagogue in Ratibor  which was one of the places where we lived  thanked her for making the service so beautiful.
I have from which synagogue they belong  Interview with Morris Rosen August 5  1999 69from which county.
In the -- in the building of the school  they -- all they build -- they build it also a little synagogue  too.
She will also participate in next month's Holocaust commemoration at Har Shalom Synagogue in Potomac  Maryland  where she will light one of six candles accompanied by her family.
And we set up a date and we met in his office there  in the synagogue.
Well  so I was worried whether I was going to do all these things right in the Orthodox synagogue  Id never offici ated in in any synagogue leave alone an Orthodox one.
Charlie  Friday night  there is time to be at home  and there are no other arrangements being made  and there is -- theres Shabbat dinner with the challah  and with candles being lit  and with the prayers  and all the children know the prayers  and they go to the synagogue  they [indeciph erable] they liv e in Sebastapal  in northern USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0059 70 California.
And for we our day start off like early in the morning we would go to the synagogue to pray with the people to with my father and older brother and doing uh we will come home say like if we would start at seven  seven thirty we'll be home  have breakfast.
I do not personally (and thats strictly speaking for myself) that if you go to church or you go to synagogue  and s omebody tells you to open page 235  and we all now sing on the right page  last paragraph That to me is not religion.
Well  I was not a synagogue goer anyway  but I don't think they were allowed.
First uh the day after the Germans came or maybe two days after  they uh broke into the synagogue uh and uh burned the Torahs and destroyed uh the the the contents and the furniture and they imposed restrictions on the general population  but more severe restrictions on the Jews  arrested a number of uh intellectuals or people that they considered to be uh leaders of society.
So instead of going to the synagogue there was a lot of screaming.
In Bivolari there was no time and no means  but still my father was involved with the community affairs  with the synagogue.
I'm pushed in the big synagogue  packed with people who they found during the day and the people 31 returning from work like me.
Yes and even to the cemetery and to the  to the to the synagogue yes.
And it was very strange because next morning  again  the gendarmerie surrounded the synagogue  it was a big show  of course  all just in case some Sovi et authority is watching.
And I have to admit that the whole experience probably made me more Jewish than I would have been in Germany  because we are relatively secular Jews and am still -- I do -- we do belong to a synagogue here as we did in Ha mburg  but it's reformed.
they dont want to practice  or -- or the holidays maybe on ce a -- when my father was alive he want me to see in synagogue -- Right  so you did. --
Most of them was near the area where the synagogue was  most of the religious Jews were there.
But you know  its interesting  because my grandf ather  and grandmother  who came here in 1939 joined Temple Emmanuel  because it was very much like the synagogue we belonged to in Budapest.
M: Rabbi Young is has a a community  a a a synagogue on the west side.
So th-they offered me the position  the great synagogue in Bucharest  Malbim synagogue  5 000 seats  a fantastic synagogue.
Tell me about reli -- what your religion means to you  and do you go to synagogue regularly?
He was a widower  a guy with lots of uh sense of humor and so he made it easier for me to make it easier to go to the synagogue in the morning.
I remember as a child  I think the only time that I ever set food in a synagogue was for the wedding of a friend or a relative of my parents and apparently I scandalized everyone when in the middle of the ceremony I loudly said to my grandmother  \ Grandma  look at my beautiful brand new black patent leather shoes.\
And we walked around until we came to the synagogue  and this young man stopped there  and he said  \ Do you see this synagogue.\
So I thi nk people know that they had to stagger  so they came after the -- the ceremony in the synagogue  they came in continuous waves  that lasted practically all day long.
So I went there  and  but when my father returned from the company to Sered  he came back to my home town  he saw already on the Synagogue wall a big poster telling that all the Jews have to gather within a week at the train station  they'll be all taken away.
We met a couple of people who from the synagogue there.
That Yiddish was my tongue and going to the shul   the synagogue all the time.
It's ve ry hard for parents to explain because we believe in a different religion or we belong to a to a synagogue rather than a church that 2 people don't like you.
I went to the synagogue on a Saturday  all the ti oh  heres the greenhorn.
I have a Jewish mother  I have a Jewish father  and obviously I was Jewish.
It well  they they had plundered the synagogue then  everything there that night.
During the high holiday services especially  like Yom Kippur  where people pray and they stay in the synagogue all day  the rabbi needs somebody to take turns with.
In a s -- very short  very  very small synagogue in Nice.
I came there  we came there in June  1939  my mother had been kill ed in November  1938 and I went to the synagogue to say Kaddish and I came to the synagogue and I wanted to say a certain prayer which we usually say if someone is saved from a danger  they say a certain prayer  which is called Gomelbenchen  you see and th ere were all people there and they said  \ You don't have to say that.\
I even proposed and asked the Rabbi I can help him with the Hebrew lessons in the Sunday school maybe.
I -- I roamed through the streets of Vienna  went back to the synagogue  which was no longer there  where I was Bar Mitzvahed.
There still are the laws on the book that if they paint a swastika on a synagogue  you can go and arrest them for defamation and that sort of thing.
There was  as I told you  there was a section  a Jewish section in the heart of Vilna  a very  very cultur al town that had a lot of theaters  archives and museums and it had  and Jewish  very rich Jewish life with libraries and all kinds of so cieties and charitable organization.
I remember  I went for Rosh Hashonah and Yom Kippur with my dad to the synagogue.
Actually  its a synagogue day school in Washington  on Connecticut Avenue.
So we actually were without a synagogue  we were without a school  and the -- the holy -- like the Torahs were piled up on -- and the prayer books were piled up on the street and set on fire  burned.
Because they would take care of it  so I had to go again where I was  the reason why I was leaving Sweden is because there wa s no synagogue.
Well of course there was the Swedish uh there was the synagogue in Stock... in Goteborg  but I think it was more a life as a Dane in Goteborg than it was as a Jew.
How did they reconcile that with the fact that you were Jewish?
The school where I went to was next to a synagogue.
You mentioned a little while ago that you were conflicted about going back to synagogue and belonging [indecipherable].
Uh the synagogue was in a section called the ghetto which was the real ghetto  the type uh that  uh the word itself means  you know  where the Jewish were kept  but this was right outside the public square so most of the Jews didn't live there.
In fact  we didn't live too far from the synagogue  about two blocks away from there.
I had met him in the synagogue on a Friday night  and he said that I was the first German Jew he had met.
So they put the bridge on fire  after they went in  and this was near the synagogue  and be cause the structure was a wooden structure  apparently -- I dont know  maybe they put bombs -- firebombs actually on it before -- this i -- I dont know either  because I actually  myself  and so the -- mostly of the town  the whole town  run away in the woods.
Afterwards  my friend Karl explained  no doubt that man had been a loyal Nazi  rewarded with a purchase of the house  bought cheaply  through blackmail and Interview with Shimon Schwarzschild April 23  2017 23 intimidation  after the terror of Kristallnacht   after the synagogue was torched.
And now I'm Jewish and my children are brought up  maybe not I mean Orthodox or whatever  but strongly Jewish.
I saw the place where I lived  where my synagogue was.
I see a city because I remember Warsaw was a big city  big houses and people running  this and that  and he brought us to the synagogue in Bialystok.
When we came there from th is agricultural school  we went to the synagogue and we were living there.
Now what di -- grade school you went to a Jewish school also?
So  there would be no services in the synagogue on Rosh Hashanah.
Berlin had many synagogues and  as I said before  there was only one congregation which ran all of the synagogues in Berlin and also the rabbis  therefore  were not confined to one synagogue  so one didn't have to put up with the same ra bbi Shabbat after Shabbat the way it is here  for example  in this country  where each c ongregation has its own rabbi  but instead  the 14 rabbis circulated.
And it wasn't -- what it was  they had already set the synagogue on fire.
She will also participate in next month's Holocaust commemoration at Har Shalom Synagogue  in Potomac  Maryland  where she will light one of six candles accompanied by her family.
Did you continue going to a school next to a burnt down synagogue  or was that done as well?
But we came by the...the synagogue and we were so shocked to see what happened to that beautiful place.
But after the war they didn't want to set foot in the synagogue anymore.
Of course  the synagogue...there  there was no no synagogue anymore because there were no Jews left.
I did not -- only once or twice I talked -- gave a talk in -- in the synagogue  about Jewish partisans  or -- and actually  I was not in a typically Jewish partisan  I was a partisan.
And we we used to go to holidays  to to the synagogue  and my father worked on Saturday  so that didnt make him a very religious person.
Afterwards when I grew up  when I was a teenager  so it was incidents  sometimes instead to go to the synagogue I went to the activities there.
There was still the mareetzah  with women upstairs and men downstairs and other things  but it -- but it -- and it didnt have a -- an organ like the Reform synagogue -- that one Reform synagogue thats still standing in USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0022 6 Frankfort now  but it -- it was a little less str-strict than the Samson Rafellhirschs sh -- synagogue.
It didn't have a large Jewish community  but it had a synagogue  an orthodox synagogue and my  as a matter of fact I remember my father and my my uh grandfather going to synagogue uh and I remember on Friday night they had services  Friday night  and we had our dinner and the candles on Friday night and uh it was it was a pretty tight Jewish community.
Ive always belonged to a synagogue  we always observed the holidays -- holy days.
There was  couple weeks ago  in another part  in upstate  they desegregated a synagogue before the holidays.
So did you have any interaction with kids who were not Jewish?
Because as I said  were not such a  that we go constantly to the synagogue.
After th e war I became engaged to a man -- to a young man from Edinburgh  one who -- because we knew all of the families in Edinburgh   I had grown up with  I had seen him at the Jewish holidays and at the synagogue and I had been very friendly w ith -- with his sister  who went to the same school I did  and he went he joined the -- the British army during the war  he was a captain in the Royal Engineers and was stationed out in India.
Now  the fact that you were not kosher  although you celebrated the holidays  you went to synagogue a lot  you got a lot of training  in a certain way.
Then  in 37 or 38  the interest broadened primarily because in - in the synagogue  during for instance the break in the enti re day of Yom Kippur  afte r the morning prayers  we wouldnt even go home  although it was around the corner  we would stay in the yard.
I started to give concerts of Jewish content  of synagogue contents  let's say  in the state radio in Belgrade.
And at six o'clock  my mother would give me like a nickel or a dime and I would buy myself a roll of butter with a piece of herring  some nights with cheese  and go back to the synagogue.
You know  it's that line th at ran by that synagogue also  that was burned down a few years later.
I became a chaplains aide  because I was always attending synagogue on Friday nights and whatnot  chaplain picked me out to be his aide.
And you saw a picture before the burned -out synagogue after Kristallnacht.
And then I remember that the Germans did not allow any synagogues but there was some sort of an apartment complex and in it was a  they had this hidden synagogue and I was bar mitzvahed in front to the whole ghetto  amongst this whole horror going on.
They took us to a gathering place at the synagogue in Berl in where a whole group was assembled for this tr ansport which consisted of 1 037 peop le.
Religion was a very strange situation because my father and mother were both Jewish racially but had never  ever been in a synagogue.
So we always had the lighting of candles in Hanukkah  and the high holidays we -- we used to go to the synagogue.
When we di d move away from to   we used to attend a synagogue but attendance usually was not done for religious purposes.
And when -- when you and Morris first got married and your parents were still living in New York  what was your -- did you know -- did you socialize with a lot of Jewish people  did you go to synagogue?
The rabbis with the sons started to go into the fire to rescue the holy scriptures.
Went to the synagogue on Saturday morning  did that even when no one else went.
In Israel I think it's considered a national ity because you would be surprised when I came to Israel how very  very few Jews ever attended synagogue.
Because there are some Jews now  who came from the vicinity  you know?
The first Saturday after this  they came and burned down the shul  the synagogue.
And he attended synagogue  and became quite important in synagogue  congregati on Shaarey Zedek  in Detroit.
And while I then 29 took my walk  I walked along the line and I sa w three other boys from my Jewish high school classroom and it was sort of an unwr itten law  you know  one Jew might get away  two Jews is already like a synagogue  so we just waved at each other with a grin  without really getting together.
And I remember going into the synagogue and talking to the man -- one of my brothers was in the Polish army  and the other  the oldest brother  he was around with us  he was not married yet  and I remember going with him to the synagogue.
Of course  we went to the synagogue which is there  which is not a synagogue any longer  its mens club or something.
They orde red us to get out from the synagogue and walk to the railroad station.
They participate in their synagogue  and thats the best I can hope.
He recalls how the synagogue was destroyed  Torahs they ripped up  and how....he describes in this letter how his daughter and wife and sister and children were killed  mentioned to me that he thought he was among only a handful of survivors of 15 000 Jews in Zelechow.
Was a house across the synagogue  so a parking lo t  like a parking lot.
The Jews there  it was a synagogue  and the people who were to be sort of awaited their deportation  they were all at the balcony.
And then th-the our synagogue  the [indecipherable] in German its called liberale Gemeinde  a liberal exa which is what here here would be called Conservative.
Sunday morning  we were assembled in front of the synagogue and we were marched to a station in Berlin  the capital of Berlin  and we looked for the train to be resettled to Riga.
Well  there was nothing but Orthodox religion in Vienna at that time  so Interview with Norbert Hilsberg August 12  2002 5naturally  whatever you -- whenever you visited a synagogue when -- it was Orthodox.
Then we were supposed to make our way to the railway station to go to Berlin on the train.
My parents were going occasionally to the Synagogue on Saturday and they were considered quote unquote a cultural family.
During this -- all of this time being in the ghetto  were -- was your family able to observe any Jewish traditions  any of the holidays in any way?
Because of the Sabbath you're not supposed to walk through there  not supposed to ride to the synagogue  so walking distance was helping.
And I later found out that ch that Leo Beck   a wonderful  distinguished rabbi  theologian  rabbi  was the guest speaker in 1930 at the synagogue that Id men tioned to you previously  my synagogue was inaugurated by cha by chancellor Leo Rabbi Leo Beck  which I found an absolutely wonderful coin-coincidence.
Of course when Passover came around I remember going with my grandmother to that same yard of the synagogue and they had a big kettle boiling away  and everybody used to put their silver in to make it kosher for Passover  and then they used to take the rest of it  bury it in the yard for the appropriate period of time  because the earth has a cleansing thing  before we could use it for Passover.
Even the people that only went to the synagogue on Yom Ki ppur and Rosh Hashanah  they still observed the holidays.
Okay and this was our rabbi  this wa s our synagogue before the war.
But he -- yes  during the holidays he was going to -- to the synagogue  but every Saturday morning  my mother was ta king me to my grandfather  who was waiting already on the outside  and leading me to his s ynagogue.
I've personally never been in a synagogue except when I travel and if I'm in a group or if I'm in Tur key then the guide goes and shows me a synagogue.
Well  my parents were not rel -- they were Jews  but not fanatical -- not religious.
It was a ghetto  and that's the end to the synagogue.
She didn't care whether it was a church  a mosque or a synagogue  just a place to thank God.
Ive always liked being Jewish  but I was never a religious Jew.
Y ou know once you neared Jewish sh ops and the synagogue and so on then you could see what had happe ned.
Well  going to synagogue  we belonged to a congregation in Newark   New Jersey   BNai Jeshurun   was extreme Reform.
You said that you werent outside religion when you were growing up  but in postwar years  here in the United States   did you become more religious  did you join a synagogue  did you participate?
And from a diary  from a written diary of my grandfather  that my grandfather wrote that he celebrated his 75 th birthday in that particular synagogue.
And then capital PO with an umlaut L-T-E-N. That had a synagogue and bigger schools and all that.
Uh 1940  until 19...till 1942  for a whole year and then in '42 uh they heard rumors that the nearby city of   which had a population of about twenty thousand Jews  was burned in the synagogue.
I  of course  didn't understand  but I knew how to read Hebrew very well.
So  they didnt all own property in Athens  and they were able to  if they had money  they could rent a room and they could buy food  and eventually we got food in through the American Joint Distribution Committee  which we could cont ribute both to individuals and through the synagogue.
>> Henry Greenbaum: Well  if you did not live near the synagogue  that was part of the ghetto.
in our house  I remember  wed always have guests for a month or two  from [indecipherable] Friday night  my dad would alwa ys pick up a guest from si -- from synagogue.
I know this  Friday night they took us to synagogue by bus and then we walked back to the hotel.
The synagogue I went to  the women had to sit upstairs  separated from their men  so I was raised in a stri ct  Orthodox home.
I wouldn't say that they had lots of social contact with them of course  because still their religion and the synagogue was  so to say  the axis of their life.
Went to the downtown branch of the school   saw what was left of my synagogue.
And you went to a regular school  or did you go to a private Jewish school?
And the truth is  I got so much of religion that as soon as I gr aduated -- rather  had my bar mitzvah -- I quit the synagogue.
The first synagogue I went to was the Rotschild  because an American took me over there.
I'm pushed back in the same synagogue where I was the day before.
Nev Id never been to synagogue before the war  or during the war  for that matter.
Will I find  how will I ... so I got to this  to Breslau about two in the afternoon and uh uh the station was right in the middle of town so I took the trolley car and I saw already all the Jewish stores  all the stores the glass was on the and here we passed by the synagogue.
And were your parents active in Jewish community affairs that you knew of?
So did you celebrate Shab bat  did you go to synagogue?
Then when I went to study  I left home and I went to Switzerland and the ve ry first Rosh Hoshana Eve I went to synagogue.
Clearing throat) And it was a (cough) kind of a narrow passage with the synagogue  the rabbi's house  the school and uh two more Jewish homes.
We were not a religious family in the sense we didnt attend synagogue.
You cant know its a synagogue unless unless youve been there before.
And apparently these people had a -- had a -- not a synagogue  ce rtainly a place where they gathered and so on.
Did you go to a Jewish school or a public school?
And it was a  a nursery  a preschool in the synagogue  and George went there.
So we didnt know exactly  but we know it right away the next day  that the synagogue was burned.
It is the only synagogue in all of Germany that had a bell a ringing bell.
So I had begun to -- to read Hebrew  and understand at least a little bit of -- of Hebrew.
Well yes  I mean  for the holid ays yes  but when I went to my grandfather  very religious  Friday night synagogue  Saturday morning s ynagogue  Saturday afternoon or evening synagogue  right?
They cleaned out the synagogue and they had -- we had services together.
So in the morning  my father  he went to synagogue  and we went to synagogue too  we met my father every morning at 11 synagogue.
There was like -- they called it later a ghetto  Jewish ghetto  but that was where all the Jew then lived in this area.
Where all the shoe s were thrown all over the place and boxes  and furniture was hacked to pieces and of course the synagogue wa s totally destroyed.
it was not at that time as far as my grandfather goes  the big synagogue which had the kind of modernistic service  although it's conservative.
They called it a synagogue where there was a room for men and a room for women and there were tables and everybody sat with batailla [ph] .
So the Jewish community that was there -- you said it was a -- it was a lovely Jewish community  where were those people from and what kinds of traditions did they follow?
So Right  right So Somebody somebody in the synagogue showed it to me  because he seen that I had a number  he says he got it from the com puter  so I should read it.
The women had cooked  and it was at the synagogue  it was service of course  and then the dinner.
I met my wife in my local synagogue in New York City  and I raised two children.
They came to the synagogue and told us whats going on.
That is Interview with Ninetta Feldman September 14  2010 116when relatives and friends from other cities in Greece  they come to the synagogue.
They had a list from the synagogue about all the Jews  where we lived and she said when she opened and asked for us  she said  \ They wouldnt be so stupid to stay home.\
And I remember going on the high holy days with a girlfriend  and we went from one synagogue to the other  but as far as religi on  religion for me to keep  thats not what directed me  I did what everybody else did.
No  it was  I went also to a Jewish school and yeshiva.
Frank Liebermann: And I did find out ten years later that there were three fire engines at the fire to prevent that building from being burned with the synagogue.
Wh-When and then Jews Jewish children were not allowed to go to school any more.
Did you have friends who were part of the Jewish community?
And he asks my father and me to come to the back of the synagogue.
So my fat her would go to the services early and then Id go about 10  11:00 all dressed up  walk to the synagogue.
You mentioned that you heard the rabbi give a speech  and that was in synagogue?
But then they were not allowed to go to the school because Jewish kids were not allowed.
You began the interview by talking about your life before and that it was a very religious home and you were going to the synagogue every day.
But apart from that  and I spoke to an Orthodox synagogue in London where there were 450 people and no microphone because I was billed as the the Shabbat preacher  if you will.
So  I quit going and they ask me why I dont join synagogue.
I went to the synagogue with my mother on special occa sions to take oil to the synagogue.
So uh the Germans ordered that all...to bring all cats and hounds in from the ghetto into one Jewish ancient synagogue  the most ancient synagogue in Slobodka  and bring all the cats so people brought every cat .
And let me tell you someth ing  a very famous man from there  that helped build the museum  behind the synagogue in Moscow said that our museum is a Holocaust Museum  theirs is a Disneyland Holocaust.
because I had a Jewish you know  I had the Hebrew school and at the school and thats it.
Of course he had the synagogue of this rabbi who he was supposedly working for and so he started building a congregation.
From mine...seven children I brought up  from my home  for everything what I worked  I'm here in a burnt synagogue and strolling and a (indecipherable)  and on the top of it  his foot got very swollen and very ill.
My brother was bar mitzvahed  but that was in another city  not in Vienna but in a city called St. Polten and they had a synagogue there  thats spelled capital S -t period.
I understand my mother -- my grandfather  who passed away when my mother was a child  actually  my mother used to tell me that he used to go to synagogue.
When you say that you were assimilated as Jews  did this also mean that you celebrated Jewish holidays and went to the synagogue  or you didnt?
And its in front of the Kineset Isel synagogue  with the name clearly visibl e. So theres my husband and I and in the center iv my -- is my son Leonard.
And I got military permission --there was a curfew-- for the Jews to stay out late that night  and we had our first Hanukkah light lit in the synagogue  in the makeshift synagogue in Schwandorf.
I knew I am Jewish  but wa -- I 8 never went to synagogue.
The synagogue was still not burning but smoldering and I saw what happened.
Hed pray every morning and Friday night we would go synagogue and Saturday wed go.
I went to a Jewish school  to a to a religious school where as I would have here.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0005 22 22When he came to this country  he asked his uncle  the first Rosh Hashanah  that he would like to go to the synagogue.
I did go to Hebrew school in Montreal  we went to Shaar Hashomayim  which is a very beautiful  large synagogue and I had Hebrew twice a week and I had Sunday school  but most of the time I either walked  or more than likely I took the tram  if I wasnt lucky enough to get a ride in the Bronsman car.
My daughter belongs  they belong to conservative synagogue and this cantor  the rabbi very  very nice.
They took out the people fr om the synagogue  the same orders.
Jewish school  because it is -- was the Jewish secular school  because we have the religion for -- i-in high school  four years  the religion.
4 Divorce (Hebrew) 5 \ 'Redeeming one's first-born'\  ceremony held in synagogue on or after the 30th day from the birth of a first-born son.
I think he must have  that must have been his other occupation  that he was actually teaching school already  besides working in the synagogue.
I know that I was Jewish because we had the -- my friend was Jew -- friend of my father was Jewish.
Such as Temple Beth El  a Reform synagogue  and Temple Emmanuel  another Reform synagogue.
You mentioned that there were very few Jews in this town and I imagine half of them were relatives.
After the service in the makeshift synagogue  oh  yes  and the president of the Gemeinde  of the community was the man named Jacob Gottlieb  who unfortunately was my age but his hair was white because I was told he watched his wife and two children thrown in the gas chamber.
She converted  and my father  who did not  and who is interesting  because I dont think practically ever set foot in a synagogue.
And the synagogue that I mentioned before  our lawyer had taken away the torah scrolls and hidden them in a...what you say  in a vault?
What about religion  was that outlawed or did people continue going to synagogue?
We felt that we have been abused  and -- and murd ered  you know  and we just wanted to be in a Jewish state  you know?
When I went home and I told -- my mother and my father  they went to Synagogue Friday night and Saturday  and they discussed it.
And we spent a day with with our children  showing them where our synagogue had been  what had transpired  and I stood at at the site where my synagogue was  where there is now a large bronze plaque  which I say unashamedly is there because I asked the [indecipherable] to fix that that that plaque.
Somehow that seemed to be the best place to build a new bridge so that the synagogue could be torn down.
There was a synagogue in this city of Vsetin  this town of Vsetin.
I reme mber sitting in the synagogue and there was -- we were sitting up on top -- because it was a conservative -- and so I was looking at the head of the men.
And we belonged to a synagogue he re  and -- I lived in Charleston  and -- by the way.
In Bratislava they took us to the gendarmerie where  as a formality  we were arrested  and interned in the synagogue  they took us to the synagogue that had already warm rooms  straw on the floor  blankets  good food  everything  and we were told that next morning we are going on.
And bear in mind that this was a period when Jews were ghettoized  but not in the sense of ghetto from the Holocaust  ghettoized means that there were sections of town where Jews lived  you know.
But I was the only Jew because other Jewish people were scared to go see a German.
Conseque ntly  we ate kosher food as a mitzvah for the rest of the community.
My  there was a German Jewish synagogue which was very formal.
But the synagogue  if I remember right  in Adelsheim was not burned.
I had been to synagogue maybe two three times a year on the high holidays because my father felt that he ought to put in an appearance and occasionally he conducted a 12 voice choir or played the philharmonia which was sort of like an organ.
How religious was your family and how affiliated Jewishly were they?
No  there was no synagogue  but there was a room that was used for services.
But she is again from the synagogue  because I dont go to Winchester.
And  of course  there was another synagogue in the proper Israel -- Jewish quarter proper  the Yuch Bunar  but we mainly went to the central synagogue.
Interview with Robert Max July 14  2015 14 Whats your first memory  or maybe amongst your first memories  of going to a synagogue  of becoming part of the community  the Jewish community ?
I think that he had secured a job with the Jewish school system when he brought Mother... along with this job at the synagogue.
A righteous gentile knocked on the door and told my family that the men should not go to the synagogue that day ; that s omething really terrible was going to happen.
That was the only time I remember that we had some Jewish celebration.
>> You mentioned earlier that you were involved with the synagogue.
And that he was opening up that synagogue for Rosh Hashanah.
Its -- well  I keep on toying with the idea whether I should join a synagogue  thats one thing.
I was very taken when I read in your book after Kristallnacht  with your synagogue burned  that you  as a 10 -year -old boy  several times went to the ruins by yourself.
And then because of Grandfather position  they arranged a special ghetto for a couple of people...uh  where the school was  opposite the synagogue.
You know that the 74 Soviets destroyed finally the big synagogue in Vilna.
Uh  that's the thing--some had families but uh after a while  you know  there's just no room and uh where the synagogue was  there was some--not synagogue  I'm sorry--where our club was uh the social club was  the social club was filled with uh mattresses and uh blankets and they slept on the floors and I guess they would rent a farm someplace and they would fill thirty  forty people in there.
But it is it is so painful to think when I was in that synagogue  I I had already learned a lot about the history of of the community  and how rich their lives were  rich in in long traditions  they these unchanged traditions for hundreds of years.
For them the synagogue was the center in their lives  both the religious life a nd the sacred life they lived.
And this was the cantor from our synagogue  says he is not goi ng to be here March 13th -- 12th and 13th and he wants to know if he can count on my daughter to come and lead the service.
My father was fluent in Hebrew  and on the high holidays  there was a synagogue about a mile out of town  and he would take over the -- the -- the part of the Chassan  and pray  you know  before -- of course he didnt get paid for it  but he was to relieve the Chassan  that he  you know  that has to pray all day long on Yom Kippur.
I believe I am I like to go to shul  we work for the synagogue  you know  I believe very much in Jewish education for the children and you know  for everybody.
In the synagogue  people were living there  too; it was no more synagogue services.
Q. At the time of all of thes e restrictions were you still able to go to the synagogue like you had been doing?
We went to a Jewish elementary school and a Jewish gymnasium.
We had still a religious  a Jewish uh teacher come to the school and we had extra  different uh religious instruction.
But there were two plaques on the outside of the synagogue explaining wh at had happened and how it was restored  etcetera.
If you want to go to synagogue that's fine  but if you ask me  I have been back and forth to hell and back so many times that I only --it's nice when I can speak Polish or when I'm with a few people who were born in the same Jewish section as I was in Lodz  but the rest of the time I seek the few who are imbued with value of humanity because unfortunately as time and again when push comes to shove it's the small minority that comes to the top when th ey have a chance  the gangsters and others  give the mafia half a chance and they'll ru le  permeate Italian government  you name it.
Do you know  were your parents members of the Jewish community?
So they released the Jews  from the Jews to walk  and he permitted them under the condition that they had bought tickets the day before  he permitted them to drive to Synagogue.
In the synagogue they put on the floor nothing to cover.
When my when we moved in here and we became we were 11 or 12 years old  my parents said  well boys  you you know  you have to think about your Bar-Mitzvah  and we went to a Jewish synagogue in Rego Park.
You don't have to go to synagogue  you can just feel it in your heart.
If you are home or you are in the synagogue  you wear them normally.
An d we did spend the high holid ays in the synagogue  but it was a synagogue that was created only for the high holidays  it was really a -- a Jewish restaurant.
Was it a was there a central yeshiva there or otherwise?
And the synagogue was right across the street from the school  my elementary school that was.
All had died  and– Now these were the thousand people who had left from the synagogue in Saroka?
it just appeared in the It appeared in the in where the synagogue was.
Amsterdam  Burgerlijke Stand  which is the civil authority  no church  no nothing  no synagogue  no nothing  just a civil marriage.
And we were transported to collection for the synagogue where I had my bar mitzvah three years ago.
I was reading the Torah myself one week  my younger brother one wee k  and a cousin of mine the third week in my grandfather's synagogue.
It was Ashkenazi synagogue  but the sound of Hebrew was peaceful  see?
First of all  it was Friday evening  and Im supposed to go with my father to the synagogue.
We belong to the synagogue and we pay for it  because we think thats important.
So it was nevertheless a Jewish school -- Yeah  that's right. --
Quite young  he was in middle 30s  or -- at the time  and sa -- for the [indecipherable] after the synagogue ceremony  th -- the Steinats had invited Dr. Altman and his wife  together with a few other very prominent people of th e Jewish community.
And for a while I was always worried that my children will be lost or my husband will be lost  and I always write  and even now with my grandchildren  and it happened in fact  we were in a Synagogue that we attended in New York and for a while I think my son was holding my grandson  all of a sudden they missing  and they were not as worried as I was  I was absolutely frantic.
We had when we moved to the to the synagogue later on we had the -- the sexton downstairs had two children that I played with a great deal.
And so we had a very worthwhile centennial  and we exposed our congregation  people telling me   oh  we never even knew that you had a synagogue down here.
The synagogue that I attended  my family attended  it was completed building in 1930.
Theyre in the process of restoring that synagogue at this point in time  but what I learned -- what we learned  and of course to the horror of everyone  oh we -- we learned through the radio and then also I Interview with Renate Fischer Chernoff June 23  2005 76believe there must have been notification by mail as to what -- what was damaged.
He is not religious in any way  but he ll go to synagogue if you want him to  but he does not -- [indecipherable] synagogue.
So  then well my parents also became ve ry uncomfortable in that neighborhood and we moved in the   the parish house which was adjoining the synagogue.
I didn't have to go to shul21 or synagogue Do you remember when you decided to take the job what you're thoughts were?
I mean hardly anybody  but the synagogue was there because it was a very very old one.
You embarrassed then they told me not to go to the synagogue.
I came -- I think when I -- they had a little bit of schooling at the synagogue in Genoa  so from the school I had to go to the -- to it.
The first time in Tuchin  they put in all the Jews in the ghetto and also in the ghetto was a synagogue with warehouses and all the wheat  the corn what they took away from the peasants  they were storing there.
I remember my parents taking me to synagogue  and I remember playing with the my neighbors children  and my father taking me sled riding in the Interview with Fred Jarvis June 9  2009 9wintertime.
And Chamberlain came home to England  he says peace in our time  the memo in his hand  and I remember next Saturday  next Shabbat in synagogue -- I still went to the [indecipherable] synagogue  Mr. Jacob saying  ﬁI dont like this whole thing.ﬂ And of course  there was the famous speech by Churchill in Parliament  where he 33 told Chamberlain y- you had to -- you had to choose between dishonor and war  you chose dishonor  thats why youre going to have war.
And I do remember my brothers bar mitzvah  how he used to have a rabbi that used to come in and tutor him but not me.
But a very close community  especially through the synagogue  which is where we have a lot of our friends.
>> Jill Pauly: Telling my father not to go to synagogue that day.
My father was a cantor in a synagogue and has been that all his life.
I didn't hear that during the night  and I couldn't be lieve this  so uh what I did was I went to my synagogue where I had been married and I saw that the the the the flames were coming out from the roof  from the cupola...beautiful edifice  and the fire engines were standing by doing nothing  only protecting the buildings next to it that the fire shouldn't extend to them.
But I would take it that there wasn't a synagogue or a Catholic church or something like that?
From the time I was little he used to take me to synagogue but  of course  it was short -lived.
We we were in in Berlin with Chancellor Merkel at the Reich strasse synagogue.
So with with my aunt with my cousin Nina   when we were in the synagogue  and Mr. Samwheel  who joined the partisans during the war  and this is how he survived  he joined them as a young man.
The synagogue is packed up and they couldn't I was looking a place where to hide.
I walked into the first synagogue that wa s in Jerusalem  and my sister who was not religious would light Shabbat candles.
And we had to go by train which was probably about an hour and then you had to walk for a bit to go to that school which was next to the synagogue in that town.
It was taken over by the army and they made their barracks there in the synagogue.
And then I remember going one to the famous synagogue of that was cours -- called the Rose synagogue  but just one time.
And Jews  all the way on the outside watching how the synagogue burns  they started machine gunning everyone.
So  around three  four oclock in the afternoon we hear that the synagogue is burning  the fire engines ran.
And we joined a synagogue  a Conservative synagogue and I think I have taken -- so have -- adult -- my husband  too  we have taken adult education classes all our lives  in -- in the various synagogues and I learned more about Reconstructionism.
What had happened was that one synagogue was not -- had not been destroyed in 1938 -- it was a Reform synagogue -- because there were houses around and they figured if they burn it  their houses would be affected  so they used it during the war as a storage and stalls and whatever.
The idea of using the synagogue shorter and living in this town  which was -- had quite a Jewish population  the idea was that we had to obey these laws.
USHMM Archives RG-50.549.05*0012 30 30 And no involvement with a synagogue here?
They put them  and they burned that synagogue with the people in it.
Yes  we belong to a synagogue  and -- and actually it was -- in the beginning I could not go to a synagogue.
Its not like the big town  every corner you had a synagogue.
I went to a Jewish high school where Hebrew was taught everyday.
We were in  when we were in Magdeburg– after we went to Magdeburg on that trip I was telling you about  we went to Berlin for sightseeing and to look around  and we found a Jewish library there in connection with the synagogue or with the agency and they had one of these Gedenk Books where all the Holocaust victims were listed alphabetically.
And the other one was Dr. Manfred Swarsenski who came to this country and actually founded a synagogue in Madison  Wisconsin.
On ly four houses in the market place  which was very big  were no Jewish and all the Jews had the businesses and the rest of the Jews were not rich  were very poor lived around the synagogue.
It was a very very nice uh...it is a very nice town and I have had a very interesting uh company  mainly Jewish per...people but not only.
that going to the synagogue was and and I guess maybe it was she was fearful.
And my father was very excited because at the moment we didn't know it was just the synagogue or more.
Her father went to synagogue a lot and I dont know if they had a really  strictly kosher home  but they were fairly observant.
She didn't care whether it was a church  a mosque  or a synagogue  just a place to thank God.
And he took you Theres a book there is a book written about that I forgot the title of it  but its access to very many many  many  let s say publications on that subject of Korczak in that library  the Jewish library on Tomackie Street  near in the vicinity of that previous synagogue I see.
And we visited a synagogue in Worms in Germany  and my question was to the guide who showed us around  who was wearing a yarmulke  you know  skullcap  a-are there any Jews who ever come here?
And now  after about two or three years ago  they decided  and there in Liberec  where the German 1938 on Kristallnacht  they destroyed a beautiful  beautiful  nice  big synagogue  they the Czechoslovak government and the Jewish organizations from Prague gave some money  and they are starting  I th ink  last year to build so-called library.
And -- And the only thing missing was the register of members of the synagogue  they saw it.
The second panel details Kristallnacht using my synagogue as a -- part of the synagogue as my emphasis.
I never touched foot in a synagogue  literally  until maybe 10 years ago.
There would be a procession and there would be marches and that somehow they were going to be against the Jews and that the building  the synagogue might be in danger.
And -- Di-Di-Did your brother have a Bar Mitzvah when he was 13?
I was always traditionally very much invol ved with -- with Judaism  but I was never a -- practicing in the Orthodox way  although I relate more to the Orthodox mood  because thats the synagogue I went to in Vienna  than to the Conservative or the -- the Reform.
Things in Berlin were not pleasant because before I got married in front of a big synagogue in in Berlin    there were certain riots against Jewish uh Jewish retail stores and department stores.
If somebody didn't go in the synagogue  what ki nd of people are they?
And he wanted her to take him to the old [indecipherabl e] synagogue there that I-I even havent seen.
And my brothers  myself  we went to the Hebrew day school.
It was a very orthodox school  where I learned -- we had Hebrew every day.
When you came to this country  did you at any point go into a synagogue?
And they did in our estate always  the synagogue youth clubs and things came out  yes.
Now its no longer being Interview with Alfred Schnog March 10  2001 76used as a synagogue cause it was violated as religious ground.
In the other ghetto was th e big synagogue y -- as a city  very famous  who 53 was built 600 years ago  and there was the Wilna [i ndecipherable] was started there in the -- lot of years ago.
Well -- Did they go -- did they go to synagogue on a regular basis?
And the rabbi welcomed me from the -- from th e podium in one of -- in his speech when I first came to synagogue.
And the prayers and Are you a member of a synagogue?
And I understand  from what I heard and what I saw  was some non-Jewish kids too among the Jewish kids.
What was Jewish about me  b ecause I know just I am Jewish.
What was not easy was the walk from my home to the synagogue where the school was located  the big synagogue.
They took away diamonds from the people  everything  clothing  and they put in that particular synagogue.
Yes  I go to a synagogue and you go to a church  but am I so different from you?
I dont know that there was a Jewish community in the end.
We used to stay home  wait for him to come home  and the on Saturday mornings we used to all go to synagogue  and it was a religious thing  but I think it was also social because we had a chance to meet with other people then.
Americanized in terms of being Jewish  going to the synagogue  Hebrew school  and all of that.
And the rabbi immediately hastened to the site  and stood there while the firemen  who were carefully hosing down all the buildings nearby  so that they would not catch on fire  but left the synagogue burning.
And it was a gentile man that he knew who told him  You can't go to the synagogue today.
The schoolhouse that we I attended  thats next to the synagogue  that was not burned  only the synagogue.
And then came the other law that they have to pray shorter  cannot pray so long and cannot use the synagogue for four hours or five hours.
Its a very famous synagogue with its golden dome  and I sang there as a choirboy.
He had the modern Orthodox synagogue in Leipzig  the big There was a big one?
A. He had never been released nor had his son by the way nor had the chairman of the board of the Synagogue  but little by little we heard about the successes and the failures and that was soon established a contact through the Danish Red Cross to those that were deported.
Here they bringing Jews from all over the town into the synagogue.
What about the synagogue where your parents went  was that affected?
But after that  here  when I thought  yeah  if I will not go to a synagogue  and my wife wanted the children to be raised [indecipherable]  if not  then they will become -- theyll stop being Jewish.
Sunday  they corralled all the Jews from my town into t he synagogue.
And then at the end of the block  there was a little synagogue.
And he belonged to a synagogue  so he knew people from there.
And we took her to the synagogue and -- where my parents used to stand and as - which is a beautiful  beautiful synagogue  Im so sorry we lost that to the Germans.
We were walking to school  and we had to pa ss the synagogue  and were all--we couldn't believe it  and somebody told us go home.
it was a very nice but a very small Jewish community.
Well  we were told  I think it came from the synagogue  from the Rabbi.
No  it was  I went also to a Jewish school and yeshiva.
Another time also that I heard a lot of st ories is that in Poland  Chair-han-off   where we lived  there was only one Synagogue.
I knew some of the holidays  but I never went to synagogue.
I don't think you can pray in a ch urch for a synagogue  I don't think so.
And that's why I believe the high holidays were always observed and stuff like this  but we weren't that we go every Friday and Saturday  the synagogue or what.
