And she found out that under this number who is the name  and one day she came to us  she wants to help.
And then we got kicked in the teeth and they didnt really appreciate it and there was a lot of anti-Semitism coming from the black community  which hurt  because theyre always trying to help others who are in the bad situation and Interview with Halina Peabody June 3  2002 36unfortunately dont get any thanks for it.
The Ritchie boys  the German Jewish people who came over who became interpreters and who were sent back to Germany in the army to help with language things.
You see  there were several agencies with international status that had a conference in Nimes and they -- there was an agreement that the govern -- would -- would permit social workers [indeciphe rable] social workers to be in these camp to help the popula -- to -- to make life a little easier for them.
But the Germans were able to go around the fortification; so the fortification didn't help at all.
So  during the summertime  we used to wash ourselves outdoors because it was so much better  but in the wintertime we used to bring the I dont think that we had the running troughs in the barracks  but we had a pan of water and we used to wash ourselves and on occasion if anybody had contact with the outside  because when went to work in the factory  you met with the Christian population of the town  and there were people who ma ybe werent willing to give you outright something as a gift  but they were willing to take a message to someone who was willing to help you and by getting something in return they would bring it to you to the factory.
On railroads I have seen mine colleagues  mine friends...that twenty people enter one one of the lines when the railroads and God forbid when somebody falls  they all fall and and there were not allowed...were not allowed to to the others to go help them pick me up.
But on the 17 th of September  the news came on the radi o that the Russians had marched in  and many people thought that they were coming to help Poland  and -- attack Hitler  because nobody knew that Stalin and Hitler had a pact.
The American joined and they came to the administration trying to find out what kind of help that they can provide.
But th e worst suffering was that we  I saw the people I loved and I couldn' t help them  and they couldn't he lp us.
For instance  when I was dean  to reach out to different groups  because I saw my parents  though they had nothing directly in common  reaching out to help people in the Jewish community  help people in the Italian community.
When I had David  an d I couldnt afford  and I couldnt get a nurse  it was my first house  I had a little small house in the valley  where I opened already my own business  that Al -- with the help from Al  that wrote me a blank check  if I need money  that he got back every penny  plus.
But it didn't help  it didn't help the pills  not talking  it was depres sing because some people can see movies and so on and read   they don't mind.
Mean  those are all decisions that I had to make on the spot  with the help of my children.
You know  rationing was establishe d. Could you tell me something about -- okay  before the ghetto was being established and the unirat   were Jews prohibited from public places?
And I was a hostess at the Embassy when these people came up to the door to ask  \ Please help.\
Well  when I went to work  no help actually  just self endurance to survive  the will to survive and also worked hard.
By then  I couldn't get any more help from  from  from the HIAS9  because I left once.
>> Bill Benson: That she was working to help pay for their education.
I'm not sure that if I would say him thats could help but what happened to him  he also perished afterwards.
These interviews and the first person interview would help me in making up a personal history.
And I remember I had nightmares about that for some reason.
With God's help one day you might be be be called to give evidence about th at  so somehow I I tried and not to forget and uh then we...after that...in that...then we were in that shower.
And at that time  we arranged that should I get into trouble  for whatever reason  I should try to get up to her village  because while she didnt know what was really going on there  she felt they would help.
And I was brought up that it was my job as much  to help with the family.
I couldn't do it any longer  and -- In what way were you trying to help him; by helping him walk?
As much as they could  they tried to protect the Jewish people.
>> Margit Meissner: Well  we got out of jail because we had friends in Spain who were in France with us who had always said we will help you get into Spain once we got back to Spain.
At that time the -- the Jewish police in the ghetto already had a stand  and -- Yeah.
Do that and do that and that was the help that I had.
There was not a child in our building over the age of 10 who did not in some way contribute.
And he told me in th e train  I was with your brother  I worked with him in the forest  and he run away when he heard that they take the parent of the people to help them.
They came up to us  and said that were going to Germany because the Russian army is near  and well be shooted by them as collaborators to the Germans because were in ghetto  and theyre going to help us not to be.
It was just that uh I remember her telling my mother that uh my father had come to her aid when she thought that life was over for her and she'll do anything she can to help us out.
But  when the Germans were fleeing and trying to escape and wanted to dismantle the machinery   this nice Germans came in to our camp and asked for volunteers.
They will help i dentify you because we have difficulty actually seeing you with the lights.
And tr ying to help them  if youre better off than they are  in their trip across the years.
My father and mother decided that I should go back to Warsaw to help the children.
There is a doctor  doctor Walz  in La Jolla in the Krips [ph] clinic and he can help you.
You didn't survive unless y ou got help and consequently I probably was of much more help to him than an American wife would have been.
They told them about mo ving furniture  but...uh...we had some people on the Aryan side already and...uh...there was some involvement of a few Polish underground people  mainly from the...from the political movements which either on the personal basis or...uh...or sanctioned by the organizations were given to us to help us get the people out from the ghetto.
And when the time for the expulsion of Soviet Jewry arrived  many families did not have their males with them in order to help organize the quick departure and everything.
And my my cousin says  you know  I I dont know what to do with you  you know  wh-what am I do we dont even know how to help you completely two different worlds.
How has your Holocaust experience in fluenced the choices that you made over the years?
You got to see to help  to be active   to be active.
I approached Goodm an  you know  the...blesse d memory...the leader of world Jewry at this time and uh I knew him personally through and uh I asked for help and for his support  and there was already a situation created by him for claims ag ainst Germany called the Conference on Claims against Germany  briefl y  the Claims Conference  and he saw to it that uh uh support was given and in this way we were able to uh add to Mr. uh uh activity  the help of two very famous lawyers  Mr. Christian   a non-Jewish man  and Mr. who came out of a very famous practice in Munich orig inally and had fled to Israel.
If I could go there and help out till the time comes that I could go on a transport  that would be a big help to them.
And when the farmers people  somebody used to get sick  they used to come to us  and the mother used to help them  to take them to the hospital.
And this museum was the agency chosen to help rescue it out and bring it here.
And Self Help  together with other agencies  runs quite a few apartment houses  whic h were originally for survivors  so I met survivors there.
Q. Were there organizations to help people who couldn't get food or -- A. No.
And of course  Heaven help you if you stole something or took a thread out of it.
Well  come to find out in not until 2000  that he was a distant relative  sor so my biological family  distant as they were  did still care for me  and did still  you know  help to establish me an-and keep me safe  and knew where I was where I was at  for awhile any anyhow.
And they keep them in...in  you know  and they tried to inoculate them and sort them  and...and  uh.... And they did not help  because  uh  they didn't know how to deal with such a problem.
And one day he came and he said  \ Why don't you come down and help us out when you are not too busy?\
No  you had to be proud of doing something  to fight the Germans and to help the people who were in need.
So I didnt -- I could not help neither  so I let her go through selection  he selected her.
Can you just summarize for me the complexity of how it was  the situation without choices for the peasants who were threatened and who  maybe they wanted help  maybe some couldn't help.
Two days later his mother  who I know from schoolin g  comes to the legation that  \ Tommy  please help now.
We never heard that you might want a child out or something so the president got up and I was very surprised and she looked at me and she said I'm embarrassed to tell you we did not help.
And I start to cry and I was in shock and something terrible I feel in that moment.
And she has no right to scream  and to cry  and to -- it will not help.
So my father took fast a st -- ththe iron stick to run to help the -- the -- th-the older man.
I was you know  I was hoping and I mean they were telling me that you know  they have various Jewish organizations were working on it and they were doing what they could.
That's okay  but  but I help as a te acher  you see  when he gave this kind  so I asked a question  what makes it .
So the stove wouldn t help much  if it was No  no  the stove but I I I am I somehow think there was a stove  but I dont remember it.
If not  lets -- Im going to help you.ﬂ And I had a hard time doing it  because I was not -- you know  and [indecipherable] I was not even an -- a citizen myself  I couldnt -- I did -- started doing that.
And material help comes from U.S. and Great Britain  for example  shoes and so on.
He came on behalf of JDC (Joint Distribution Committee) to help the refugees and organize a kitchen and supplies.
He looks at me and says  \ You're going to help me  you little Zhidan?
And my father saw me...that I'm going in a brigade  but he couldn't help it because he was...his brigade passed by already  and it filled up....his brigade already.
We tried to help as much we could our Jewish families and the whole Jewish community  and -- Was there -- 27 -- [indecipherable] period. --
I also  in between  would help out mothers with little children like I was a babysitter.
Okay  I needed help because I was in charge of the ambulance in this special camp in the reeducational camp  but the other doctor friend of mines took my place and I was in charge of this camp.
I was Jewish for so many years  and I like to be a Jew.
He looked at me and said  ﬁWho are you?ﬂ And I told him  he said  ﬁWell  if you helped me to come aboard the ship  I ought to help you.ﬂ And he gave me a seamans book  which is kind of an ID card fo r sailors  and with a seamans book  you can actually work on almost any ship that needs help  but I lost the seamans book eventually.
The...I think the the help of of the farmers  the help of the people...we went on living.
I think that's what made Freda leave-when I said to here that you could help me.
So  of course  me  myself and any of the other children  were not allowed to receive any kind of medical help or treatment.
I told him I didn't need anything other than to help me to go through that pe riod of that hour or two.
26 Was there any leadership coming through the synagogue  or the Jewish community  do you think  to help people deal with this?
So this  to make the ends meet  you kno w  both of them were working to send us through schools  and all the exp Did she have any help at home fo r I mean  hired help  or did she do everything?
You can see in the files telegrams which I sent and and...several weeks before the actual started of the occupation of Hungary  and immediately when it was undertaken  there's another great telegram where I asked uh what should be done in order to counteract it and it should be made public c ounteractions so the me dias or the radio and so on  through t-he free radio from London a nd the and the...it should be very...an action encouraging not to cooperate with the Nazis  encouraging the non-Jews to help the Jews  to hide them and 80 on.
So in Germany they put us into into the camps I see because we didnt into a DP camp.
When I asked for something else like this  ﬁWe dont have it  we dont have it.ﬂ They did not go out of their way to help.
The Jewish community has always had its own organization where if help was needed uh even to the point of sort of like a banking system  gmiluth chesed  where if someone uh found themself in dire need and needed money to to tide him over  he could go to the Jewish community and get some of it.
Anyway  said: What is your what do you help us out financially?
And I tried to help them; well  because either you try your best or you you don't care.
So she would so they had a lot of people that they knew in the villages  and whenever a woman was expecting a child  they would always ask my mother my grandmothe r to come and help her deliver the baby.
So these [indeci pherable] bring their two guns  so they go out into a village  to look for some contact with the other partisan groups  and maybe they would get some help.
Im not going to help those son of a bitches against those son of a bitches.ﬂ So I said  ﬁWell  you dont have much choice  do we?
We had gotten a place to hide through the Jesuit  of the Catholic church  who were working in the Resistance  and they found a place to hide in The Hague  with a widow who took in Jews in order to -- not necessary help Jews  but to help her to go to heaven.
But for me at that junc ture  it was important because your colleagues here all offered to be of help if they could  which was very generous and I appreciate that very much.
And uh  the people that were peeking through the uh  uh blankets from that area  and what we called Canada  the  the people that came to uh help the uh transports get off the trains and uh get off the cattle cars and  and um  um help with the selection and take all the clothes and everything else or tell us what to do.
You can -- when -- when you couldnt help it [indecipherable] the shooting was going on and yo u hit people  you didnt even know youre hitting them  but when youre right in front of them  you have them in front of you  and say you [indecipherable] you say something or I shoot  I couldnt do that.
He was a genius in mathematics and I was excellent in Latin  the Classics and Literature  so we used to help each other.
There was some Jews living there from the Bolshevik Revolution  and some Sephardic Jews from India--the Sassoons and the Hardoons--and some of the others  that had organized some committees to help the arriving Jews.
She was running ba ck and forth and I didn't think shell survive  you know  to help me a little bit  hard job.
And uh then after having passed this area of industrial buildings  uh we entered...we...all of a sudden I saw a a camp surrounded by by barbed wire  with watch towers and SS guards with machine uh guns  machine pistols  and when we drove into this I said to my friends who were standing next to me from the youth movement and luckily we were still sticking t ogether...may God help us to get out of here alive.
You can defend yourselves.ﬂ The Germans are going to help you to defend yourselves?
You get all assistance  help  etcetera  yes  but you have to do it yourself.
And my grandmother  shall she rest in peace  she used to help them  too.
I mean -- Was your family -- did your family know what you were doing?
You -- you helping for so many people  I want you to come through an-and help us also.ﬂ They said  ﬁWell  they're really responsible  but since your situation is that  you know  bad  then you have to -- if you sign that you are going -- that we can send you wherever we want  that you're not going to stay in New York  because in New York is very difficult to get jobs and New York is very difficult.
And I was very much afraid for her  that they would take her.
And the reason I felt bad is because had the tables been turned the other way  on the other side  I know our family would have done anything to help.
All of these thin gs give some meaning and they help in going on  I think so.
There was a girl close to the rectory and that girl did a lot of black market and she thought it was sin and then she wants to buy her sins off by giving money to me to help the people who were hiding.
They cannot help beca use there is no place to run.
And I want you to help me out  whatever it is.\
But my mother would have the small Christmas tree in the good living room  for the help  on Christmas eve  which was unbelievable.
And people were very nice  they were trying to help us.
And with my fathers financial help that he gave them  they were willing to take me -- and since they had no children  cause they were a young couple.
>> Steven Fenves: Once I made this transition from being close to the living dead to a purpose and expectation  after that transition I was determined that I would survive  determined that I would help other people survive and that became very easy.
At that time I had the documents on my own name; however  they were documents very strong which I received from the underground channels  underground help.
Uh but they called it kapo and it has been...had entered the the language of the concentration camps  so you had a kapo as the leader of the...and he had certain foremans to to to help him  especially in bigger kommands  37 bigger bigger bigger kommandos  but then you had the SS also so they all then uh uh were around us to to watch what we are doing and how we are doing it  that it went fast enough and so on.
The Luxembourg people told me -- Luxembourg authorities told me that you might be able to help me.–ﬂ ﬁWell  they do that periodically just to make you feel that when you get across the border  you will be all right.ﬂ ﬁThere will be no problem so that they should be off the hook.
It was quite chaotic  but the allies brought in a lot of help.
So the Mayor sent a message that he don't know if it's gonna help or not  but when we gonna stand in appell Saturday morning and we gonna hear that speec h  we should all start yelling with one voice  \ We don't care if we gonna go....if we gonna ge t killed  we're not gonna go nowhere.
Well  Im grateful to be able to tell what I can Thank you.
And so we were...uh...also not only consoled by strength you see  by this sacramental help and assistance.
I wasn't sure that part how to buy the ticket  but besides I needed his help anyway if he could offer me or at least not to betray me.
She died about a month ag o. The synagogue has a sign  people to go and help  and she did.
I could certainly handle the one in front  needed somebody to help me with the star in back and I didn't know that a Video Tape No.
In terms of food and medicine and equipmen t and so on  how well were you equipped to help these people?
And what– I understand that you were not e ither feeling Jewish or understanding what it meant to be Jewish  but you saw Jewish people including your mother and your aunt– Mm-hmm. –
And when you see the whole picture... a month ago I read about this man in United State  who help people to die.
I didnt know if this is for me  you know   yeah  yeah  that was very active   mine par belong ed to organization to help people  only to help.
If you don't want us  we will not stay  but we have to have that you should go to Raddan a nd bring Kashmish here and he has to help us to deci de what to do.
But it was a great help to me  and I had special speech classes and they made it possible for me to finish high school in two years.
Anyway  and I thought I will try to do what I can to help.
Because based what Officer Schwartz told me not officer  he was a sergeant  whom I met and who was the one that used to come with the with the with the trucks  and we used to help the our soldiers used to help to pack them.
He says  now this will help you  ther it will stop hurting.
>> Bill Benson : Bob  you would eventually be sent to work -- we had mentioned in the introduction you were sent to help rebuild the destroyed SS headquarters.
He says don't...you know...they they try to help me  you know  in this time.
We were not going to let anybody give us the impression that we are poor and uh we needed help from anybody.
But anyway  they come down and got us  they says  you will help us with the wounded people in the bombing.
Anyway  and that way I was able to support my family some money somehow.
They will help us out in the factories here  factories there and that's all.
But I went through this alarm before the gate closed to her where she was  and I said  \ Now  you wanted to help us once  maybe you could help us now.
I was screaming for help  help -- and they start to run away.
Now the German  the watchman  the S.S. man  would have gotten help from somebody missing.
And he had to help her  she was she had such a Hunchback  or she wa Interview with Frida Ruderman October 15  2010 20 Yeah  she couldnt straighten out  and he helped her.
They were ve ry -- there was very few [indecipherable] so I -- I took the chance to run and see the doctor and he could help me.
Thank you so much for being willing to be our First Person today.
Do you think that you got any implicit help from non-Jews at the camp  I mean  that maybe they looked the other way  or -- That's what we were waiting for.
The towns people were brought in to made help bury the people  to dig  help dig the graves  uh  and bury them where they're were mass  which they did.
They were adopting orphans who - by the way that's quite a story that these orphans were brought half way around the world and I found out later  you remember there's a story about Hannah Szenes [NB: Sennesh] who who who said I'm a match that was not to be consumed  where she volunteered to help save - I found out that Haganah  that the Jewish underground  had formed a railway and taken youngsters and put them into Christian homes who put their lives on the stake to save Jewish kids where the kids would be hidden in these Christian homes by day  and in the evening  at sunset they would pick them up and ride them through the mountains and ride them to the next town where they had another Christian home.
We could not  we were not allowed to help each other.
Nothing what you can I  you know  to help or something.
Uh  there were  I remember  uh Kapos who were rude  rude to uh  uh who uh who uh  uh  uh  uh  had  uh  who  ought to be  or were  were to be treated like the Nazis themselves  but I also knew people who really tried to  to do the best in order to help  no doubt.
I mean  some of us stayed on for years to help until the displaced persons camps were liberated.
But Ive been to Warsaw and talked to people who are trying to create a Holocaust museum against some odds in -- in Warsaw  and so I tried to help them with the -- the sense of giving them some -- some support.
Its to help another human being  cause we all belong to God and we all his children and we should help each other.
I loved moun tains and lakes  and theres theres a inn that need help.
And as it drove by and he managed to convince the truck driver that he was a British parachutist who had ended up in you know parachuting in and who was there to help free Poland.
Before  I helped a little bit so when my father manufactured shoes  I helped a little bit home  to help my father.
Now  that camp was a mixture of youth  middle aged people  pregnant  sick and the biggest thing being in the administration  what we were seeking for help.
As I started taking care of my mother I would drive up there twice a month and I would pay the help and I would do the shopping for her.
I once went to Warsaw  1941  then to Lublin  I was travelling to Lobartov  almost daily  to buy food to help  you know  to do something.
A ll of a sudden -- well  she asked me if I would help her in -- in her divorce  because she can onl -- if she admits adu ltery in court  then she can divorce.
So  did he help arrange a visa for you -- No. --
And then in the middle of the shakes I went to help a friend that lived up in the hills  in the dark  with my husband  because she was there alone.
So they did not m arry for ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 10 a long time.
You know  and help the other side  but it took a little while.
What they thought that you would help them in terms of resisting what would happen?
Interview with Harry Iticovici August 24  2010 70 Well  I dont know  this may help somebody maybe  or maybe the somebody gets some use for it.
And she opened the door  and she says  can I help you?
Yo ur mother was powerless to try and help you  shes barely keeping alive.
They ask me if I can help them get a train  that they have 70 children  and they would like to get a train to Krakow from Stettin  north to south.
The shammos  people who assist them  to help them; and he had a whole group of about twenty of them.
Then when we arrived and we finally thought we were arriving someplace  like I was going to help my mother with the little sister to take her out of the train  and one of the workers  the Jewish workers  pushed me away.
I don't know what's going to happen with me ext  but for the foreseeable future apparently I'm free  and I'm able to help him  meaning helping the Japanese.
So she pointed like th at  and she went  and I was praying  oh my God  help me  Dieter should pass by. [
It was too something terrible and this people inside  they begging outside they ask to help.
This will never be forgotten  as long as I can help it.
But the the Joint Distribution Committee came in immediately with food and with equipment and I was amongst the first that was standing there and I have a picture with me with little children where we're giving them food baskets and and trying to show them that there are other people out there who care for them  who want to help them.
And...uh...the police department  and also a arm band and at that time the Germans didn't recognize if you're police or not police  so he...she pushed him out from the line as they were taking us to the side for the sick people and she said  Maybe you can help us.
If you get her a nice box of candy  maybe that's going to help.
And you are watching  and you are going to help those people.
And then when I'm in trouble  I'm turning to him  ﬁGod  help  God help me please.ﬂ And  sinc–since a couple years  I started to attend synagogue and that makes me feel good.
From what my sister told me  my father used to raise money among the little Jewish community to support these people.
And so I was able to create and help create beautiful things.
And few people put me on the table  they help me and I just realize at that mo ment that they are going to take away the toes of my foot.
The only person he managed to help it was Wallenberg  and no more other  because there was uh diplomatic persons who was not coming out like it is not a to mention Shalutz .
Could not find the -- any medication for it  could not find any help for him  and he died.
Because  if you do something nice to someb ody  or you help somebody  that person could always do something else for you.
Tell her he would help her only if she would stay with him.
They tried to take us in and help us a little bit.
It doesn t do anything to fight the Germans– er– to help the Germans to fight the war.
But they they came up to let us let us know that they were glad that we were there.
So if you cannot help anything  dont knock it at le ast.
If I was if I was if I could be of more help to one particular situation  I did it.
He was the physician of the 20president  of the prime minist er and of the poorest people who gave medical help without without any pay.
Jacqueline's father found two reliab le farmers to help the family escape across the demarcation line to the Vichy -controlled southern zone of France.
Dont be silly.ﬂ So my mom used to say  ﬁWell  why dont you let at least the girls help you with the dishes?ﬂ She said  ﬁOch  let them go and play.
As the front was getting closer  there were more requirements and more necessities to for for for the Germans  for their supplies  and they needed the the help and th e and the cooperation of this verstattin  so they used to work overtime.
I was standing there when they took her and fortunately they came later on for me because I was very much afraid about her not that that I could do any help.
I didnt have to  b ecause I lived with my uncle  but the other young women and men had to work to help support th e family.
And they were saying we are chasing the Germans  they are losing the war  stay here a few days later doctors will come and they will help you.
He would come back and say  ﬁWell  he had a very serious case and I tried to help him save the animal.
So you married this man in or der to  how would it help you to run away if you were married?
And everybody had a different story or a different people trying to help.
But other  many people thought is to do something  to give our contributio n to the fight against the Germans.
Thats why he told me  ﬁI cant help you  I am student  I dont have money.ﬂ He lived with his father-in-la w and his wife and -- and the son.
DA-88 code KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/BEREL ZISMAN page 36 Interviewed (5-7-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: got pulled in.
No  its very  very unusual  because at that time to get a ship was more than [indecipherable]  it was influence  and you know  having people help you.
So  again  it took four weeks but at time already we ha d a lot of help.
Is that because people didnt know you were Jewish  do you think?
And your mother was able to manage once your father died?
If God will help us  well be able to see each other.
And we are laying there...I remember  but then they took us to other barracks and over there we went also to work in tunnels.
If he wants to  he will help you.ﬂ I t ook like my last money.
The million children who died is as important to know as to know the fact that some...I don't know...some four thousand Jews survived in Berlin along  with the help of Germans.
In other words they didn't need passports and so there were specia l cards worked out with the cooperation of the home office in England  with a picture and s o...which had come from England and then the German police had certified the the the uh the name s and the age and so on  and these were cards which which gave the young people of that age a license to enter England  so the first thing we did...was I did was  with the help of my friends  to organize these cards in alphabetical order and in geographical order in order to have some kind of a of a of an idea what was what  and then it would give me some some worki ng room at the desk and organized the telephone calls to such extent that  you know  when  for instance  it happened a telephone call came from a from a desperate parent from anywhere and said what's about the application of my of my of my child  and then one of these social workers jumped to that table and they they they fished out of the of that mound of of paper the the the permit  because they said yes  I remember it had arrived this morning or yesterday morning.
I think we tried to be straight people  honest people and we live our life and we try to help poob -- some peopl e. But thats about everything.
They had to– she became yellow and he couldnt help her anymore.
But she started to say  oh  weve had the Jews  you know  here.
On behalf of the U.S. Holocaust Museum Id like to thank you for your time and your help.
Theres a whole wall of people names that did help  and I was in a shock  because I didnt know that.
Even if you had enough to eat didn't mean that you were able to survive.
More people who try to help those innocent people  what they went through.
And that s what we wanted to do  thats why we were all there  to help them over  cause theyre the ones that did the dirty work.
Dont you think it would help me if I had some money  what was taken away from me?
An d in fact  in 1963  within a year  I was sent to Warsaw for three months to help run the field office that was verifying claims of American citizens by going through the country  checki ng the land records if they existed  checking  investigating with the neighbors and people who still lived there  whether such and such family really owned the bakery or really had the butcher shop or or or owned the an apartment house  and that was very rewarding  I-I think.
In fact  my grandfather offered my father that if he moved to Breslau   there was enough of a Jewish community that he could continue to practice me dicine  and if he needed a ny help -- he had been the family patriarch.
That wasnt difficult to make  the soup  that if you did nothing else.
When we were being gathered -- when we were being taken to the train  while we were in the ghetto  in our hometown  these neighbors never came to ask if we needed anything  if they could help us  if we were hungry  if we were thirsty.
And the queen of Holland  Queen Wilhelmina  at that time  had said that she was going to help people that were in distress  Dutch people in the distress.
And you stick when you want to do something you stick to it  and help each other and I want to see close family  like I am with my sister and my brother now .
There was a period of time  and maybe it still goes on  that when you gave a fair amount of money so that i-it would help Yad Vashem.
And they tried everything  a lthough some of them were very poor and it was very hard to sup port themselves overseas  but they were working as waiters and some help from the parents.
>> Irene Weiss: We knew that  but we couldn't help it.
Very mu immediately after they started to make not pogroms  but antiSemitic signs before March 1939 when the it actually was hi with the help of Hitler was established the Slovak Republic  and the Hitler occupied [indecipherable] .
And I said  ﬁPapa  go out and help Rocholla in the kitchen.ﬂ And we were on the second floor  and I said  ﬁCornelius  spit it out right away ﬂ you know.
And since we had had this stamp in our papers  that we were most USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0033 16 likely not Jewish  and merranos and all that sort of stuff  which was like an exemption  my mother had had that in her papers and th e Germans didnt first want to recognize that  but when she was in that camp  with the help of friends who lived there for quite awhile  they recognized that.
And we were afraid of Jewish  it -- it was Jewish police as well as  you know  the -- they had this Jewish police which supposed to deal along with Ukrainian and Germans  with the order  you know  whatever.
The child still is coughing  go to her  and tell her  it used to be said that if you have whooping cough  a change of city  a change of climate will help.
inaudible] Did the kids did you a nd your brothers and your sister help out on the farm?
But he used to go if somebody was sick he used to help out.
And 39 that was very helpful because he said if I have di fficulties at the at the military controls  you can help me out  and that's what what what we did  and we came to that meeting and there was uh was...for the first time a representative of the of the uh of the Joint  a representative of the Central British Fund of England  a represen tative  I understand  of the Pope  because there were not not Jews only in Belsen  and the...this representati ve spoke spoke uh Fren ch only  and interesting enough  there was a lady amongst us who answered him in Fren...in Frenc h  and I thought it was a good friend  and this wa s because you know   she had studied in France for a certain years and spoke French fluently  so uh th at was that was...call it stock-taking and we we we we we spoke about our hopes and our this and our needs and they said alright  we will try as soon as possible  we'll go back to England and to America to organi ze help for you and uh at this time  uh made it already very clear that this ought to be done in cooperation with the organized group of the survivors.
Pause) And I told him that I was prepared to help him.
I was there really for some hours to get some help  some assistance  but you see if you...if you did then have some inner strength and I would say...uh...desire to survive and to overcome all sufferings...also the very little sickness would you suffer  brought you to crematorium.
So he thought that he would survive among the Polish people.
>> Bill Benson: Before we continue  I want to ask you a couple of questions .
That was not legal  but he felt he needed me and I did help him.
And its Soviet Army telling us: The Germans are losing the war; we are chasing them; we are going to run after them ;a few days later some medics will come and help you.
So obviously she persuaded the priest to help her and he did and she was free.
They surrounded them with barbed wire  and had Jewish police with helpers staying there 30 at the gate  where you going in and going out from the ghetto  stayi ng there and helping the Germans who getting already there -- you sa y to German soldier and just stay the Jewish with young men  and all day long stand by the gate to help each other how to not to run in any troubles.
And I thought  well  let me go and see if I can help.
Yeah  every single day to help her and to wash and to iron  and she was madam.
And But but you know  you have things in life  and I like to give people help.
But he  as a human being and as a priest  he told us  ﬁI want to help you because it comes a ba d time to you.ﬂ So I cannot say he is a racist or he is a political anti-Semite.
And this way I know that there was nothing that anybody could do to help  not even for the closest and for the most loved one in the families.
Did you get to know many Jewish families  how did that work?
The Kultusgemeinde is sent with us  of grown -- grown people to help us  to be with us.
And believe or not  he went to this certain ranking officer of Gestapo  Mr. Gerouto Rito  and he say fine  I -- maybe I can help him  yes?
And I cant help it and I know German people and Im friendly  but there is this residual feeling and it isnt just the Germans  its the Austrians too.
So  we went for train  and they said in Wilno we have the Zionist organization is active and we should take a ride over there and see what kind of connections we can make and maybe I can find the connections to move to go to Palestine.
A lot of friendship used to form that even todays survivors  that because they were in th e same room  in the same concentration camp: they were in the same truck  they are life-long friends because of a lot of survivors dont have families  they say that she is my step-sister  she is my sister  she is my ghetto sister; so a lot of friendship  we used to help each other a lot.
And be a -- with my work  no matter what I did  I could help the family a little bit  which was very important.
And then we got notification from the embassies who came to Europe to help us.
Maybe theres a juggernaut that we cant stop that were going to need help.
I mean restitution claims by the German citizens and German sufferings and non-citizens  Jews who had suffered in the in Germany  but I done also a good deal  more than any Jewish source  including the whole American Jewish effort  to rebuild  to help Israel onto its feet economically.
The sirens start coming up  out  and was very foggy  all of the sudden a fog came down  and they suppose to Czechoslovakia and the Polish Underground supposed to come in  accordingly what I heard  they're supposed to come into the camp to help us out in the uprising.
Later on I found out that what had happened is that the SS troopers who were running the camp fled from the camp on April 11th  and the underground which was in existence in Buchenwald  in and about Buchenwald  took over the camp with the help of the prisoners and started straightening out the camp before the American soldiers even arrived  which was a day or two later.
She took care -- she used to go to homes and help and change the jobs a few times.
>> Bill Benson: That's when you went to work in a factory.
My oldest brother had to help my father so I took his place as well.
And then you know to be released from these camps  you really had to have somebody who would help you  you know  a lawyer and somebody who would help you with presenting your case as to why you were  well in my fathers case  why he was in Britain with a you know three week visa.
We were asked in Allentown Pennsylvania was a 64 school established a couple years prior to our coming to this country  and they asked us to help them out.
I went to Washington University  got some scholarships and uh got through there with a little bit of their help.
And so  if I could draw some kind of an emotion  that would give me some hope for the future  maybe that would help to see me through whatever this is that Im Im getting in -into.
Well  thi -- the circle vot -- of women  the volunteers sa -- I guess what I was interested to hear was that there was this sense of solidarity with the new arrivals  and trying to help  and that it was organized help.
Th-They are very -- people that will help anybody that needs -- my -- my oldest son is a dentist  he did for people so many jobs that he never charged a penny that couldn't afford.
And Ive you know  they hoped that they wouldnt have to come to the Pacific after they finished the war in Germany and help fight there and we ll  they were actually  they were they were trained to go for the invasion of Japan and all.
And she would go for help  and she said  \ Mom  I got to a po int where I wouldn't tell them that I'm a Holocaust survivor's child  because they woul d get into it  \  and she said  \ and my problem had nothing to do with the Holocaust.\
I am much more impressed with a group of young men and women in Budapest who assisted people in surviving  who risked  the Jews who risked their lives to help other Jews survive.
Youve got -- we can help you now  we may not be able to help you later.ﬂ And what did you think when you were hearing this?
If you wou -- wi -- he would be enough wise  he would help  little by little to go out  people in the night to the forest.
Also  they asked me -- and also the French governme nt was kind to ask us  if anybody to help the people after the bombing  because sometime a lot of the people were killed.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 15 >> Bill Benson: Do you know anything about what that was like for you?
And the people were waiting for me and I gave them the stuff and they gave me the money.
Certain organizations a -- are ask you for clothing  you give them clothing  you gi -- you know  whatever  you know  whatever you can help out with.
I mean  did they give you help with 56 Camp sisters (German) 47 things  other than with the letter?
And they had their equipment  and  of course  the partisans could not help it.
And we help people  we send kids to camps  various camps of their choi ce.
So I would help him  but he wasnt pleased with me.
And I thin k that they were able to get a doctor in that house to help her.
But other than that  I mean  in the in the Riga ghetto  she was doing laundry for the wellto-do Jews in the ghetto for food.
So he said that if she would be able to get into the hospital for a few days they would help her a lot and she would be able to come back and be all right again.
And  also  during the work when we were not controlled by Gestapo  some people came to us and...uh...working a little  we have heard their confession and of course  tried to help them  strengthen them  to deepen their faith  confidence.
There was a Polish unit  a Polish army that fought -- decided to come into Poland  to liberate Poland with the Soviet army  and help establish a -- Vonda Rosherefska  it was her name -- and to help establish a new Polish regime  a Socialist regime  so to say.
And he said to me \ Per Anger  you have to help me .\
After three years  they heard about it A2: They want to help.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 20 And she explained the situation.
So  he went to the hospital and -- with a heart attack and he died.
He -- he was a volunteer head of the Jewish family service in Dayton and basically personally gave 107 affidavits  of course with the help of the community.
But individually  certain people are definitely against pers ecution and when they knew you were in trouble  they were ready to help you.
And I would sometimes say either in German -- and I would always apologize for sp eaking German  and I w ould try to bring in Yiddish words that Id learned  as much as I could  if I couldnt understand somebody  because there would be other people there  and often people would sort of want to come to help you to understand the story.
Ive done this all along  supported them  got food for them  gave them the money that I earned.
And I know there were two or three other children who were learning aroundyou know  we were learning about the same material and that if I finished my work sometimes I was told to help Jill with her reading  and I was rather proud of myself that now I could read well enough to help Jill.
But they left a certain amount of people behind for the running of the town and administration and all that and once I was able to get around again  the Russians did help us to get some food.
You were helping people who needed help desperately  and I guess we took days off occasionally.
And so with the help of the Hungarian police they were easily identifiable.
Uh  I said  \ Well  I can't help it because uh  we are under the obligation  and I've given my word to serve as long as I can  and  and also uh  uh  it was so I had my parents still living in in uh  in in uh  uh Germany.
Like when my wife was in the concentration camp  this was like -- first [indecipherable] to go help him that some Jews are th -- I have a concentration camp.
That was military government and -- but I remember one time  this guy coming -- coming into my office after there had been a lot of criticism of the armys failure and in the inter -- there had been an intervening week  where they had done all sorts of things to help the DPs  brought in supplies and whatnot.
He had the help of the village people and other priests and many others.
Well  I always liked children but I never knew how much you can do to help them grow up and to help them to develop their abilities to see the world  to learn how to talk.
But uh for uh for uh  what what is this holiday called in English sometimes it's it's hard to translate on the spot uh it's it's a spring holiday just befo...just before the frost uh  help me  it's fat fat Monday in French.
22 Was it your sense that the Jewish administra tion and the Jewish police tried to help and support the community or were they corrupt in basically saving their own hides?
He went exactly to Spain  with the help of the French underground  Madame Philip.
But these kids USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0062 37 did not know  you know what I mean  any be tter  they were not brought -- I says  ﬁSo therefore  Ill make my biggest request to you   lets take the kids out of the camp.ﬂ And before long  which again I have pictures to prove you -- that point  if at any time you interested  but since we are doing it just for -- on a tape like that  but if you would be interested  I will be more than happy to supply with copies of the pictures  where  at this particular time  the Palestine brigade  or the Jewish brigade  as it was called  which it was attached to the British fifth army  came in to help  not the Joint Distribution Committee  and with their trucks  which you will see on the pictures  Ill -- Ill show them to you afterwards  which with their trucks  we took the kids  and we shi-shipped them out to a separate camp to make a camp  where they could be tended to the needs those youngsters were needing  and they were the first ones to be shipped even illegally to Israel  by means that we were not even aware of how  but they shipped them out  a nd they gave them the treatment that needed.
After a month  my uncle found us an apartment and he  he was a tremendous help.
So I was not busy  my -- actually what I occupied myself  I tried to help the people who came out from concentration camp  in tatters  hungry  starving  till it was organized  till they could get some help from o -- Jewish organization.
A : Well  I would go into the market and  you know  I would work on the floor  help train the salespeople.
And he is st rutting in and the two people the three people outside  because there was already Gingka  who was also coming to help out in the household.
And again when she could  she would come in and bring me a potato or whatever she could.
I -- oddly enough  I didnt have any contact with agencies  I didnt get any help from agencies.
But finally  with the help of Joint  they were able to get one room  and that one room was set up as an office  the regional office for the Joint.
I tried to learn how to play something  how to sing  so I could make a living  not for myself but for my family  so I could help my dad because he was ill.
Because they learn a lesson  that you have to help somebody if you need.
And she was happy to have me because she used this money to send  help send her son to law school.
So  I asked a law student to do some research and we got a little help from the National Economic Development Law Center 59.
So all these relatives who were living up on the third floor  they didn't help at all  they didn't do anything?
They had tattoos on them and usually what happened was somebody would come along and say that we just got so many prisoners  but we couldnt afford to have men take them back and -- and take care of them  because we needed tha -- our own help and our own men with -- our units functions coordinately Interview with John Bucur August 18  2003 30that you couldnt spare the men.
I went to him a nd said  Colonel  do you want to help me.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 31 [The presentation ended at 2:01 p.m.]
And  I didn't get along with my sister-in-law  she's still alive  I di dn't get along with my sister-in-law  and I visit once my brother  and they were locked up in the little room with the 2 kids  and it was dirty  and it was miserable  and I say  I rather go to my mother in Poland than go to my brother when I get out  I have to go to my brother  and be hidden there  and  and help him with the little kids--I didn't know that there was a gas chamber or something like this  so I go rather to my mother in Poland  than I be locked up in there  with my brother there  so I di dn't get out of the  uh  out of the  uh  police station.
And they used -- they were young people  they came to the house to the gate to lend certain things to help them out.
And from this moment start relationship  very good friendship with Yanoush  who help us all the time.
I am forever grateful for the help I received and the opportunity given to me.
ﬂ I said that's why we have to help other people.
Interview with Barbara Syska October 22  2014 65 And then the war started  so he  as a scout  went to help in that hospital  because he knew thats more important than that  but he was going not to be involved.
And Golub also  Tory  talk with the Miller from the Gestapo  and beg them and offer th em a big amount of money  and told him to help see that his life will be protected  that nobody will touch them.
We got raised even as a child  you know  that you have to collect mo re to help the other ones.
Rose Metz   who worked in pulver room  is telling me th at she did know  that she did help.
So he dressed as a Polish peasant  with Mr. Bereczki's help.
And it didn't help Elkes's said he has a wife  he has a family.
I know him  I was with him togethe r. So he came over to me  he knowed me by name  he called me with -- by name  he sa ys  ﬁPlease help me.ﬂ And he was on the list to -- I dont remember even his name.
We've prepared a brief slide presentation to help with his introduction.
Found a professor that thought I could help him with some of his USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0075 33projects  and so I started with the pr ogram towards a doctorate de-degree at Michigan State University.
I supposed to help and I help because I know my character.
So this was a very big help 43 for us because in the winter  usually  we sold some cows and then we we killed one so we had meat enough for weeks.
We we had household help  and as I say  my parents my dad used to be traveling quite a bit as a selling for his business  but my mother was home all the time.
And they were given what was called an affi davit  the right to come to America by a Catholic nobleman in America of German origin  who was very charitable and provided lots of help for Jewish refugees.
And when my mo ther called the hospital  a colleague of my father  with whom they had -- not socialized  but with whom they had had dinner at various times in the early 30 s  said Im sorry  I dont treat Jewish children  I cant help you.
She would do the dirtiest work and she would get a little extra soup and she would give me a little bit  bread or a little something you know to help me.
Charge was what kind connection I have with the Jewish people  why I help and was against some very interesting situati on.
And so this spirit you see of common utarian sympathy assistance was lacking also in Dachau  but as a rule we must say that all the priests except those that were in the German block for priests...uh...with some exception of course...all other priests tried to help each other.
We were left alone to fend our way  sick and with no transportation and no help.
And help out  but my father was very  very depressed at that time because he realized what a terrible mistake he had made.
Well  I was  uh  an engineer and and as I said our  my project was to  uh  help bury the dead because my buddy  Al Salzman  was on a bulldozer and I helped him grease it and maintain it and  uh  had opportunity to see quite a lot of the camp.
While you were working in the registration  whic h is practically the whole time that you were there  were there ever reasons to manipulate documents to help the prisoners?
Germany was not well supplied in those things and there were always shortages and of course we depended on the goodwill of the Christian shopkeepers  or the German shopkeepers and they Interview with Alfred Schnog March 10  2001 13as I said before  there were always those who made it their business to help out and we found that my mother always found means to bring in what we needed to subsist on and all often I-I dont remember us starving  I dont remember us having any difficulty in in getting the th ings  the substance that we need the subsistence things that we needed.
It was a very exciting time  to find people who could help the U.S. government become a new family of weapons.
And my father wanted me to help him in the hotel and I didnt like that either.
And they took him to Felcher  you know  the closest help  but there was nothing that can be done.
It's ve ry grateful that that hospital was there  because they could help do the things that were supposed to be done.
I call the Dean of the Columbia School of Public Health  whom I've been working with very closely for two years  and I say  \ Help me out on this one  I'll rendezvous with you at the emergency room at Harlem hospital.\
You see then in April we all remained in 45...we already heard of the victory of antiGerman...uh...German soldiers  in the battlefields  and it was for us also a great help and assistance for strengthening our bodies  our minds  and our lives.
So  nobody was willing to give the destitute people any help.
If we couldnt make a living  he wa s going to -- he was going to help us live.
Are there other memories you have of your own personal experiences during the war  you're own involvement in trying to help people?
54 03:06:58 And I was assigned to the kitchen as a kitchen helper  kitchen help  and I was working there  cleaning the vegetables and it was a very hard time for me because all of a sudden I had to become a Polish girl with all the Polish mannerism  which I didn't have.
And if I can help in any way  Ill be very great to do it.
And also again  to help make a living  they would my fath er had been a prof was a professional chef  they would have dinners that peopl e could come to  about once a week  for pay  or for money.
He had two kids of his own  and uh he just couldn't get away from his camp often enough to be with us  so he he spent long periods of time with us  Charlie did  and tell us stories about his family back home to help him feel better.
Well  one of the consequence of total war is that the Germans suddenly decided that they were going to get -- they ca -- whatever help they can get from whatever quarter.
And Aron through Ha-Shomer ha-Zair  again contacted the Bricha 26 and with the help of Bricha we start to getting out  to getting out.
My father used to raise money among the other Jewish families to help them.
He was hoping to find some trace of the family which could help.
Another one had to go the next one and to pick up the food from the Pollocks  which we were dealing with them.
Afterwards  they made it Interview with Inge Katzenstein October 17  2001 18mandatory that the men help the war effort  and manage the ranches of the British that had gone to war.
He was an engineer by training and he was so moved by an experience he had in Lyon  when he was part o -- that he was with a group of adults and children  had been arrested and although he was a ver -- Jewishly very fringe and very secular  he felt a need to work with -- to help the Jewish people in France.
I felt that I could be of help to them if they needed me.
And inside -- and these were people hired by the Fascist party  but we always found people -- the bakers  God bless th e bakers -- we always found people who could help.
Then he says  ﬁI want you to stay in the camp of Agde  and in th e village of Agde.ﬂ My father says ﬁWhy?ﬂ He says  ﬁI want you to help free all the people that can be freed from the camp.ﬂ He was -- a hand to the heart.
Lillian: There was an underground  yes  that was trying to help people that didn't look Jewish and trying to give them some papers.
And hands were sticking out and yelling and crying  \ Help  help.\
But they used to live by my mother's grandma...my mother's mother  and we had some aunts in America and they used to help.
Was there any effort made to send people home or help them find their families or -- It's nothing -- it's nothing to go home.
We tried to help each other  if one was weak  we tried to put his arms around the next one.
I feel they were like children who needed help  and nobody was ready to help them.
Electricians  plumbers  sanitation people  mechanics and all that sort of thing to send up to help us.
I was thinking why -- I couldn't understand why we don't get any help from outside because they saw what is happening to the Jewish people.
And of course  one time she was even denounced  again by a an elderly woman who had a a daughter  and the Interview with Sabi na Berggren January 30  2015 85that daughter was sickly  so she did it fo r an egg  because she thought that the daughters sickness  which was I think she had TB  but I dont remember now that eggs will help her.
Finally I managed with the neighbor's help  to get him out.
Uh whenever they were in need of money to help them through a period  he did buy from them and uh I guess he must have advanced them money.
She was trying to help people who were coming to the comm unity to kind of get settled and start a new life.
Only if they start to touch Jewish people in United State  this is another story  but otherwise  we sendŠt his is what they sayŠwe send money to Israel  we help them.
I was very happy that I could do such a thing.
Then we always involved in organizations that help children all over the world.
She cannot help that Frenzel helps her with things like that.\
Im just curious whether you had any feelings or emotions or thoughts of like you know we are help ing to in having this child you were bringing something back or you were helping to restore things or you know what Im saying.
He never...because I was older...he never...if I wanted to pick up a piece of lumber  he w ould say Mr. Bludosky  let me help you.
Or working on black lung  working on trying to help make black lung regulations more responsive  little more liberal  where more than five percent of the claims are approved.
So it gets to the point anything you can do that can be anti-German  whether it was help people get to Sweden  whether it was blow a railroad car in the air  whether it was put a bomb on a ship so it woul d sink  whether it was publish papers  whatever it was.
We sort of decide to stick together  one another  help one -- we said  if one gets weak while youre marching  lets help him  put hi m under the arms an-and -- because if you didnt  if you get left towards the end wh en everybody walks and you get stopped  and you keep walking away from him  they kill him on the other end.
And every day somebody would go take turns  one day Binna would go and warm up the food a little early and I did  I had a day when I didn't feel so good she would help.
AtZ < e Xtal Tell us about your >**ning.- < > Qvlve I t(a ew13 Well...uh...so  I was doing some running for that place  running around  delivering to the pottery  and also trying to help out with the clay  kneading clay and so on and so t forth.
His name wa s Gildemeser  G-i-l-d-e-m-e-s-e-r  a Dutchman  who was trying to help the Christian Jews.
So  bread was very important  to the point we were starving so much that sometimes when a person died in a family in the ghetto  they did not report him for a couple days so that they could pick up the bread ration and help themselves for a little bit.
Everybody was trying to help one another without having a Schindler hanging on us  you know.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 3 hear about in a little while.
Interview with Fa nny Aizenberg April 21  2011 53 Well  they were surprised that my husba nd would go  but I felt it would be wrong of me why shouldnt he go if he could help us?
Get the prou -- help get the professors for the courses and that kind of thing.
And he was able to get to America without t he help of anybody through what was called the corporat e affidavit.
they imprisoned Charlotte  but we managed to liberate her to help her escape.
At one point Benny went for a meeting with the anti-Fascist committee and totally unexpectedly was handed a one million dollar check to -- to the Claims Conference that we should  with a milli on dollars  help needy Nazi victims in -- in the United States.
And then you made arrangements to come to the United States?
What did your mother and the remaining members of your family do?
Since I was familiar  having worked on it knowing the holding place and all  I got help from some of our friends.
He tried to do his best to help people but that again didnt last long.
Can you help me?ﬂ And I spent a lot of my time in the courts  in the summary courts  that is  the military summary courts in Munich where I had cultivated -- because I saw it as my responsibility -- cultivated acquaintances with the judges  who were American military officers.
To hel p. And it was upon a time that when we survived  that I said  I will never help people.
And after that they tent -- they -- they tried to get rid of me to sign out  I said no  I want to help -- I need some help with my hearing.
We told the Hungarian policeman that if you want to help us  if you can  in the King Street on that building and I told him the address...93 or 95.
There was anot her um how the girls  they had only one way to help each other or to survive.
And if but if you had help  you couldnt stay home.
And -- you know  I was happy that I was able to do this  it was great.
So what we did was use the information we got from these people and those cases in which it was useful to help us with leads and things like that.
We had to we had to report  and we had to do certain work for the Germans.
And I tried to make myself useful and to help  because there were immediately wounded injured people coming in.
And what does it say  or what do you -- what -- what did it help you to do?
And he persuaded me to do it  with the help of the brigade major  Sir Maxwell Hopagow .
Everybody wanted to help them  to give them something  candy bars  anything that we had  but that -- that wasnt doing them any good .
I was recruited to peel potatoes and help with the kitchen and with the cooking and things like that  to repair socks  and help with the little ones because I was one of the older children.
And so your experience in Israel  did that sort of -- [indecipherable] Cure me of Zionism?
My girlfriend  the one that's in Canada  she is not young and she's ill and we try very much to help her.
There was a small handful of Austrian socialists there who tried to help each other and apparently he would sleep with one fami ly one night or two and then move on and I didn't tell him what happened to me.
KOVNO GHETTO EXHIBIT Interview w/CELIA YEWLOW page 16 Interviewed (5-1-97) by Sandra W. Bradley Wentworth Films  Inc. 9400 Kendale Rd  Potomac  MD 20854 TIMECODE NOTES: too.
That if you discuss cases  you have to keep on the professional level  without reference to name.ﬂ I -- that was the -- th-the philosophy of welfare in those days was that you can -- you are to help the person to help himself  but nothing -- not -- not to -- to USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0013 114 provide for him for a lifetime.
The real Red Cross  later on they told to the Red Cross that we are there and they came to visit us before Christmas  the real Red Cross  the International Red Cross.
And they bringing the wires and  you know  they came up with loudspeakers  everything  everybody has to go out and help building the gates and the wiring.
He got a few very -- I mean very -- jobs that were very insignificant and h-he didn't like them and so -- so he's not working as a lawyer  but he -- he would give his shirt off  if he can help somebody.
If you have nobody to help you  you have to go back to the old country where you came from.ﬂ You believe that?
You try to help other people  you give charity  the way my parents used to; whatever you took from home  that's you take for life  for you.
I say  \ Couldn't you be -- so big shots  couldn't you help that man?\
Later  Jewish leaders  especially those who were very active in the protest action and enlisting help of sympathetic Bulgarians  were rounded up  arrested  and banished to that same place.
And they were an elderly couple and they had two so ns and one daughter  and they needed help.
He was offered some psychiatric help  but he knew how it came about  and he knew what he had to conquer and he did it hi s way  and he is fine now.
If you help us  we will help you  and many other people.ﬂ Now  I dont know why they -- he needed help  I have no idea  I dont know.
They were the ones that stood up and said  ﬁThis is wrong  we will help.ﬂ We must always remember those people that did stand up and did help.
And when -- Interview with David Brombart May 7  2007 16again  I dont know when exactly  but I remember that my grandfather came and -- and ask me if he knew that my father put some money  that it will help my mother  who was in there  and I show him the money  an d I remember very well  across the street  the -- the -- the Jewish gangster who work for the German  ach -- no  is a -- Mis -- Mr. Jacques   you know  in the leather  you know  coat  and who was the one who was the denouncing all the things  etcetera.
Oh yes  well  not not I mean  they didnt campaign  but you could see theyd look at you with those empty eyes  and beg you  really  to help.
I like to show to help Trebli nka guys from Treblinka.
So thats what I do  I got -- belong to the Wiesenthal Center  try to help financially  nothing else I can do.
What my mother said to m e was that what they're going to do is to go find a hiding place  then they'll move us again.
It's much more important to be nice to your neighbor  to do things to help  to be concerned about your neighbor.
It was many  many different people who tried to help and okay  there must have been a guardian angel in one way or another  wh ether you believe in angels or not.
So and she come home  shes mad as a wet hen and and so I says  well  I couldnt help it  I said  thats thats what he he wouldnt let me go  and I says  and I had to have a job.
The circumstances under which I left  I left Gurs was that a social worker from the OSE 5 came to see my mother and explained that there was a village Le Chambon  who was looking to help young people to take them out of the camp and would she agree to let me go.
But working in the kitchen you were ab le to help other people with food?
From Germany to Italy  my -- my husband had some kind assignment to work some -- somethings -- to help out with some kind of -- some kind of job.
His mother came and she tried to help him  couldnt help  she couldnt help him  he was -- of course  they closed the borders so nobody  nobody -- Right. --
I was -- I was helping  and I still help UJA  and as much as I can I try to keep our Sephardic tradition because unfortunately we are not as many as Ashkenazi.
I got semicha there and I talked about this  they tried to help Jews in Europe  they send out packages to them  they send out packages and then I tried to find people from my birthplace to whom I could talk and who maybe knew more about what happened at my particular place wh ere I was born.
But  when we came to Auschwitz  we realized what the man told us was true  but we couldn't help ourselves.
You know  a lot of them -- a lot of them I know are poor  a nd depend on help wi -- from ot hers.
And then particularly to...they came to receive some spiritual help  spiritual assistance that is to say to revive their faith that we live not only here on earth.
He didn't know that he cannot help us and so he died and was killed.
If he can help you  he will try to help you.\
We started then the and I tried to help her to get some firewood for her.
What did he do  what kind of work did he do?
I said  th-this will help you in wa in Poland   Poland  the anti-Semites dont go over there.
I think that's were the last transport  where they brought Hungarian Jewish people to Mauthausen  and we have seen there  you know  when we got out and stand in line  we have seen a lot of dead people where you come in to go in  they were already transferred from one place to another for weeks and weeks and weeks  and and then they choose some people to help uh take them to gather  to gather the clothes and what was left over in the wagons  and I got one of the two uh choiced   and I helped just clean up the the wagons and then we put everythings in such a a what people in the two wheels like wagons but we...they...instead horses  we pulled it into the lager and the camps closing with the what you have bringed back from from Hungary where they taking them in the wagons  and then when I arrived in Mauthausen  when I arrived in Mauthausen...I don't remember exactly the time...I have seen and we looked in in in the lager  I've seen in one side woman and one side men.
So  you know  its like a good month and a bad month  and a good period and a bad period  and if you combine it all together and you have this support  so to say  of someone that loves you and you love them and you are aware of the fact that you have to help each other  I think that this is a secret of survival.
Well  I can remember working on one of the wa -- halls and they came and said when -- that the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor and we all thought that was such a shocking thing  that you know  they -- here these boys were taken so completely unawares and decided that this would be the type of the thing we would like to do  you know  go in and help take care of them.
Every day when we came from work  I was going to her and I developed very big...very big sores on my legs  very bad circulation  and she would help me.
So I decided because I could speak Russian  I could help in the Cold War.
Like when -- wh en some survivors came in  she would say  here is the Jewish agency and here is their -- the synagogue and what -- she tried to -- to help a lot of people.
First of all that they remember  they want to help  money no ob ject.
I am part of a program where they talk about nutrition and cancer and I help them with their grants.
He seemed to be able to help people  get money and really accomplished something incredible.
He and his wife  they were accepted  we picked them up from the train  they brou ght him to his house and people started to call us to help and we signed up to the Congress of the Polish Surviv ors and they did a lot to help me with him.
And he tried to help us at the beginning but then he was very busy with his own life  personal life.
Our job was to help building a new facility where munitions are going to be produced.
If you see that there is Gestapo around  pretend that you are collecting for the winter help  that was from the Germans.
But I saw how he went from ﬁPontius to Pilate ﬂ from one person to the other  begging for help and nobody helped him.
Did you help your mom with any of th ese activities in small ways or --?
We tried to alleviate their problems by just show ing that we are there for them and for them  especially for children who came out from broke n homes  who had who had uh a brush with the law and so on  so that we considered them as uh as people who had to be saved and this was part of our work between our contribution to try to help them  a nd uh this was I would say very important because there we esta blished personal friendships  uh girls and boys and and uh we we we we followed the principle of Boy Scouts.
You havent got enough arms yet to join our group.ﬂ But they did help us out  for instance  to go and get some food.
Maybe my father can help look for it  and I think that became very clear that we better produce it because she really wanted it for our protection and she said all you have to do is  you know  keep the the red flag and cut a round circle from the white  put a black swastika on it and she came to collect it.
And I remember the Red Cross in the in La Gare   in the station  and they would help all the people and give them hot chocolate and things like that.
So you saw sports not just for the joy of being an athlete but as a  a way to help you further yourself.
Did did your mother help out in the butcher shop  or no?
Uh and uh my position th ere was to be of immediate help to the survivors because for most of them I was the first contact they had with the Jewish community outside.
And I employed two other guys to help me  to work with -- for me  and I paid th -- Where did you get the sewing machines from?
I had a friend there [indecipherable] they took especially girls  I mean to you know  for for help in the house  or housework  or so forth and so on  but you know  we were not in we were not danger of our lives.
I wish I  this is  this is the one thing I wish I could help him with and I can't.
Traveling from one son to the other one  going to Israel and make sure my wife feels good  make sure I could do everything to help her  because bothers her  a lot of thing.
And we set up a small loans committee so that a lot of these men could become hawkers.
And Im not going to let it happen  if I can help it.
And we decided that in order to help them  we not only had to sanitize Germany economically  it 7 was the Marshall plan  but we had to do something also for the education of the new generation.
I dont know how long it took to get us out there.
And he asked me what he could do for me  a-and I asked him  you know  that I had applied for aliyah  I hadnt heard  is there anything th he could help me with.
So thats the way -- thats the USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0060 7 only way.
Hiding just starts as we enter the house of one Mrs. de Swaan  3 who was a a fantastic woman 3 Truus de Swaan was a woman in Amsterdam who collaborated with Boogard family to help find homes in the country for Jewish children.
27 So you didnt experience any -- they -- they knew you were Jewish?
>> Esther Starobin: What I think is important  most of us can't influence hundreds of people  but we can all help one or two people and it has a ripple effect.
I am here just to help you as much as I can.
And Renia  because she was kind of a valet to the SS woman who was in charge of the entire group of supervising women in camp  so she liked Renia a lot  and she says  ﬁHow can I help you?
ﬁShes in this block  I want to help her  but today is no time because late.
I promis ed myself that if I survived the war  I'll help them -- let me compose myself.
And Germany have a hell of a time  the whole of Poland was invaded already and Warsaw was still fighting.
Jews don't deserve ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 19 medication.
Subsequently it didn't help anybody anyhow because it was just another gimmick  but we did have the papers.
That there are very few people who really go out to help another person.
I'm a member in the men's club and   and Jewish uh Temple Israel  and I'm a loyal and honest uh member of the community and I tried to help.
I mean  if the Rabbi has a demonstration somewhere  I go besides him  you know  help him out.
And I started I had fever and somehow I remember this because it really happened.
Uh the the only thing we could do was again that the Jewish uh community went into action and established interestingly enough call it cooperation of the police and the Gestapo and some relief uh uh and work at the uh railway stati on where these transports came through and I participated also in that work uh uh because especially bene...came to help the younger people  the contact between the youth movement members wa s still there irrespectiv e of their ideological 11 orientation  Zionists  non-Zionists.
You must come and play like you the friend from my husband and you are the person to help me  that you have a place for us and took us away from this house because I am not able to stand this situation.
That would still be in Miami and it was some anti-Semitism fr -- shown from the people  but there were organizations there also because they wanted to help us.
And I know that one time a soldier came and asked me to go to Scheveningen  and there was a big battalion  and I knew it was there  but I didnt want to help them  so I said  oh yeah  ther e  and I sent him 90 to 180 degrees the other way. [
And th -- what -- they were fluent in German  I gather  as well.
So they were asking us what they can do for us  and they tried very hard to help us  but as I said  it was a little too late.
They had many friends and father played cards and my mother had as I said before household help.
So our friends took us to the train  and we loaded us in.
Most of the time we were busy sending packages to the camp  the camp in Holland for everyday some of the children were picked up and when we found out  we sent packages to Westerbork to help them with whatever they needed.
I did not understand quite enough to unde rstand while he was talking  and he said  ﬁYou have to help her.
He didnt survive  and I met him once and I couldnt do anything for to help him.
I was standing there and I said oh my God if I could just help.
