Many of the children were sick with scarlet fever and of course I caught it too very shortly afterwards.
Maybe I did once or twice  and I think I was very sick afterwards  so I never did it again.
That they asked her if I am sick  and she said  \ No  the child is only sleeping.\
Some sicks people -- sick people get help and -- and they had clothes and so on.
I dont know  because I as I said  I wasnt feeling well  I was sick this time  because as a matter of fact  I dont remember too well about the staying in Lublin  in the camp  and as a matter of fact  whatever I remembered  was funny story  Henry re-remembered differently.
My -- this time my father was -- when I me-met her  my father was very sick  he has a cancer  and approximately two months  I think  when I met her  he passed away.
But my daughter  being 22 months old  like I say  a little child  they usually can withstand it and they dont get sick.
She was  in any case  a very sick person  I had no idea  at the time we were deported.
And we knew girls that that worked...worked in Canada that also knew some girls that worked closer to the  to the Krankenbau area so a lot of times when Mengele worked in some of the sick  sick bay - he had a room  he had rooms there where he did the experimentation.
He was very sick man when he -- when he -- when we seen him.
He must have had very a very strong constitution because I don't remember his getting sick or anything but I know that it was it was terrible.
We only stayed that one day  so when this 10 years later  when we got the invitation to come back to Germany  I didn't want to go  I said to my wife  \ I  I  I  I'm not going to go  I ge t sick and all that.
Going to Auschwitz  they put him over there  to take care of the sick people.
But they were...their job was to take innocent kids and older people ...sick people  all kinds of people  escorting them to the gas chamber.
At one point my mother was very sick and he tried to get the sugar  some of the lumps of sugar to her.
What had happened  when I came to Foehrenwald   you know  all through the war  I never got sick  whether for whatever reason  I was never sick and I always do attribute my survival because I was such a healthy kid.
And they tried to take us all the sick people first so I was  you know I wasnt sick.
So then Dr. Elkous went over to them and said I need bed linen because there are more and more sick people here and if I don't get by this day  I will go on a hunger strike  and he did.
Was married 22 years  20 wonderful years  two years terrible when he was so s -- terribly sick  yeah.
This is a sick man  th is is cause when I saw him in Lingen in 1945 in July  I saw a man bent over  grayish hair and and his face was grayish  it he looked like he just came out of a tomb.
So we left and my sister -- and I was very  very sick  the -- again we met another Russian  because the Russian liberated that area and there were lot of fighting and took me to Danzig and left me on the steps of the hosp ital.
When my mom was liberated  she was a pretty sick woman.
So I was very upset over that  I was very affected.
My sister from Sweden was sick  so she c ouldnt join us.
And since then you were young so you could climb up so you were up there and of course when you are up there which was good Interview with Liselotte Epstein Ivry 25 November 29  2012 because you had air and when you were old and sick you were on the bottom and it was pitch dark and it was like hell there.
She laid down in bed  and she always used to pray I don't want to be sick  I would like to lay down and die.
He said that for my condition  I -- it's very bad  because I could -- I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0012 68 could get sick again and I have a child  I shouldn't have any children.
The orthodox Jews supposed to cover his head  head when he say the prayers and we said the prayers  and he interrupted in the meantime to go over to others who were sick and who were really in bad shape and he said prayers to them.
Took care of us for awhile and the mother by this time had a very bad cold and was really sick  but we didn't realize how serious it really was.
Anka was  still in Australia now  she is sick and her husband  Bachrach  passed away long ago.
That revere was the s-s-sick station  where sick people went  because they made sele ctions there  you know  and killed people.
I used to come home  my parents used to think that I am sick  because they served dinner  and I didnt eat it  I was not hungry  because I ate with him in the restaurant.
I was so sick on the subways that I was more in the doctors office than at home.
And my father was a very sick man at that time.
So  we were very sick from it b ecause I had it on my back and on my body  and it  it was  it itched  it was very  very painful  and I was  I was very sick.
Leave your sick ones home and everybody has to be at this and this time on that field.
And I -- I think [indecipherable] Y-You couldnt -- you couldnt wait to get out of there because he was sick or because it was Vienna and you -- and your [indecipherable] It was a combination -- it was a combination  I think.
Consequently  there was a in the camp  there was a a a other dead people.
They had to it had to be anybody who was sick  they would throw them out anyway  on one side or the other side of the train.
In the meantime my mother got sick  she was in a hospital  and I had to make a choice where to go.
So you -- w-we --were legally sick  allowed to be USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0048 18 sick  22 - 23 - 24.
I went back hone and I cried myself sick and I was very upset about it and talked to his.
I was still  you know  poor man  sick  in the military uniform  because only wa -- everything was burned.
You know  it -- its -- its like a shambles and -- you know  so here Im thinking about these big projects  that really require time  and you know  and then a part of me thinks of myself as being nonvulnerable  and the other part of me keeps saying  ﬁYou know  Sams been sick  your sons been sick  youre s -- getting to be 65 years old  what makes you think you might not get sick tomorrow  and you ma y not be able to finish this project.ﬂ So its -- its kind of a real conundrum about  you know  how is this going to play out  and I -- and youre young enough so that you may know the answer some day  but you know  I -- I just -- I just know that each day I get up and there are a list of things that I have to do  thats a mile long and -- and the -- the two books are kind of sitting on my back like -- like these two kind of weights that keep sort of banging at the back of my skull  but theyre not all that high up on the list right now.
We were very hungry  there was a small amount of food and the people were very unpleasant for us.
We were sick  we were tired   we were hungry  we were thirsty and we didnt care.
But he used to go if somebody was sick he used to help out.
I had extreme diarrhea that they -- I begged them to take me away already.
No  the only choice we were given to others who did stays  was like my friend Hannah Tenser from Israel  who was left in the gas chambers because they ran out of gas  or other people who were too sick to move; they were left behind as refuse.
We got the bakeries going and a little later on we got carpenters in  from the German soldiers  carpenters and plumbers and to get everything back in order because a lot of things were destroyed in the  by the people in fighting and then they destroyed it themselves because they were so sick of the camp--they were trying to knock down wire and everything.
I put some straw in my shoes and I got a little taller and all of a sudden a German walks in and says \ We need one more \  because one of them was sick.
I was sick to my stomach and did not know maybe malnutrition or whatever and Poland and that time was already soci alized medicine.
But I was sick  and my -- my husband quiet me down after that.
He said  \  do es somebody always have to die or be sick ?\
And my late husband became very sick and I never really connected with her  so this is something Im still have to do one of these days.
Things were very  very bad  because a lot of people  we didn't have enough food  they used to get diarrhea and they used to get sick.
But all of those people on the truck were sick people.
It was just very  very sad about the old people  and some other people wanted to know about what happened to the sick and the infirm.
I hoped that maybe  maybe  but I had little -- little hope for the people who were s -- were sent to the left  because it was a lot of children  a lot of old people  a lot of sick people.
Yes  no more in hiding and I wa s this family  old  sick  uneducated people who Edwarda Rorat 6 February 25  1996 Page 6 saved my life and who are poor  who work hard  and I also work hard with them.
Women  children  old people  sick people  anybody who could wal k  joined the army.
And I we went to Krasnoyarsk   and a you know  that my sister was very sick.
Go to the woman  tell her you are coming with a sick child  and Mama did that.
And like I said  I got exa-examined  and they said to me  some people  ﬁYeah  but you -- you act like a -- like the strong guy  youre a military officer.ﬂ He -- some -- some people said  ﬁYou dont look sick to me.ﬂ And I said  ﬁIm not  I ﬂ -- USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0065 34 but -- but when you go in the -- the Germans  you got to tell them you -- you suffer.
You have to go  by twenty-one everyone has to go to the ar my except that somebody is unable to fulfill the demand  sick and so forth.
And everybody was sick on the ship except me and my brother.
I would like to say to the women and mothers that will listen to me that the love of a Jewish mother or any other mother  I don't know  I am Jewish so I am speaking about the Jewish mother  was so strong that one day  you know  that tracks would always come to clean up the concentration camp from old  sick  invalids  and children  and my mother always managed to save me.
And I was so sick that I prayed that the ship should sink  and -- and I didnt eat anything  and it was -- I was terrible sick.
So the viewing general told the camp commander  so he said  ﬁThats kid is sick  why you make him march?ﬂ So he talked to my first sergeant.
But if one of the kids were sick we sent them to the hospital.
She was sick  I don't know exactly what  I think bronchitis or whatever.
You know you make  yes  people but you bring food from the gypsy camp to give people who are sick.
And of course  the medical corps went with them  and they put the sick people in the hospital  and the others went into the barracks  but first of all  as soon as we brought them back to Hillers leben  they were so dirty and stinking and filthy that there was nothing that we could do to give them clean clothing  so we had to have them strip their clothing off  and the engineer battalion set up some shower points  and we started moving them through th e showers--the first shower that they had had in months and years.
And -- he was sick  or something happened  or maybe of starvati on he died.
I says  ﬁLeon  I am risking my life every day by cheating on the Germans in s -- in stealing medications and covering up for sick people.
I lost my son -- my oldest son was sick and he died like about 12 years ago  and when I put a -- his stone -- when they erected his stone  that tombstone  I also made sure that therell be evidence of -- of his past  so I wrote down that he was son of survivors  and grandson and -- and uncle of Holocaust victims.
Interview with Ursula Marx June 8  2016 56 Were you with her during the time when she was sick?
Always a place on the floor for everyone whether they were sick or old or pregnant women  children  everybody on the floor w ith all of our belongings.
I remember vomiting every day and really being sick and then finally my mother  you know  take me -- took me back.
We knew the truck came periodically to take the sick out of there.
That was crying and crying and getting sick and it was Ill never forget that.
And your mother  did she stay did she get sick in the camp  or did she stay healthy?
I don't want to go into any particulars  but I was sick. (
I didn't know I would live among the dead and the sick and the hungry.
They -- I mean  they wanted to finish us off  you kno w. But after the liberation  we have been transferred  so probably the very sick ones were  I assume  transferred to some ar -- to some -- something which was a hospital -- ma ybe a makeshift hospital  but a hospital.
So uh I wrote to home and my mother wrote wrote my letter to me.
And and then there was then there was the hospital  I went on the hospital.
And and what but when she does come back  shes very sick Yes.
Oh  but then he took a -- a document from the doctor that he is very sick  and the trial never -- he died.
And I got very sick going through the channel  very sick.
But he said I was very sick and so he said  \ Now  there are two things.
Most of the people marched partly people who had taken on trains  on open freight trains  and driven to Germany and tried to put them into place them in into different camps  and I ended up by train ten days by train  only once we got food  and here again  I had my armband  that I'm the camp oldest of the see uh  we had a good office of uh  uh reeducational camp  and I took one car and put sick people on there  maybe 15 to 20  and I had uh blankets to cover th em  where  on all other cars  there were people standing because there were   they put in 100  120 people  there was no place to uh  to lay down.
Sometime w-we get together with my friends  we talk a little bit about it  and sometimes some of them dont want to even hear about it  ﬁOy  you make me sick  please dont talk about it.ﬂ So  well weve been talking about it for almost two hours.
I got very sick the end of September and th en I was sent home.
I said well they'll be real nice to you in the camps  and if you get sick  if anything happens  if they can't take care of you  they'll send you back to our hospital which was 123rd evac.
He got sick in the prison camp  was repat...repatriated back to France  immediately joined the resistance.
My body didnt -- didnt do any -- as a -- I -- I h -- I had -- I -- I was co -- co -- really sick.
Oh  I just went with them from lo to right after the liberation there was still some of the Nordhauser Nordhauser concentration camp inmates living  but they were sick and they were dying  so the chaplain said to go and talk to them  give them the last unction  or whatever.
If I tell them how sick I was and when I had -- that was (speaking a foreign language).
My aunt was sick and my mother would not leave my aunt.
Then I became sick  I had again a pleurisy and I was taken to the mountain  my grandparents house.
No  she wasnt sick  but all of a sudden  she had problems.
In Hamburg  which was Hamburg Oxensal   I became very sick immediately.
There are a lot of peopl e that are sick and poor among survivors.
I got sick from that too  and Interview with Bernard Pasternak October 22  1997 12then one SS guy says to me  who one SS doctor says to me  you understand any English  American?
When we were settled  we were  let's see  Sam's mother and sister lived in one room and we found a possib ility to move into another room  Sam and I. And for a short while we lived alone and then they brought a man very sick with Typhus and nobody wanted to let  to have him  cause it was very co ntagious.
There's a long story  again  which I won't bore you with  just to say that I got very sick.
Because you can get sick and you can die or they can kill you.
Was very sick  very drunk  so he would teach us about two hours a day.
Robert went back to school  got very sick with whatever flu t ype   I think it was the Asian flu at that time.
You know yourself  if someones really sick and loses a lot of weight  gets better  they do come back  but -- the body is a wonderful machine.
My mother got sick and she was taken to the hospital and she never came back from the hospital.
So  later after what happened when they found the sick one there covered  you know  and very sick  they killed the policeman.
But the interesting part of the kibbutz business was that at some point--fai rly soon--for some reason I don't recall  there was a...somebody was sick or they needed some body to take a shift in the kitchen.
And she once came and told me -- I was sick with something  I don't remember what  some childhood sickness  and she told my mom that she would like to take me to her home and feed me better food and give me a bath and keep me for a week or so.
I wa s  with my sister  we were very sick because even until today  I don't travel well and I had seasickness and even in the beginning on the plane.
And he says  ﬁYes  he has around him more sick people than he is  so hes feeling fine.ﬂ And he came home and every first of July  we went out to the country house.
And on trucks we were brought to Split  but on that truck  I was  got so sick  I was vomiting so much th at I wanted to get out  at  to get out  which I couldn't of course and I managed and we managed to come to Split and we were going over  this  the roads were open  partly open from bumps  but they still  they were free  I mean  they made them free in order to get us ou t and we got safe to Split and then Split  we got a ship  I think  to Barrie and then I met my parents.
64 And -- and until today Im flabbergasted how I didnt get sick.
Yeah  you see when I got sick with typhoid on the way home from work  somehow I still was weavy  you know.
And I was washing out the blood  and felt sick over it  brought it to a place where where they where the SS were sleeping on the floor with with and there was a panzerfaust or something  you know  a grenade  and I thought I thought if I will grab the grenade and throw it  maybe well change our b ecause we could hear the Russians in the back.
Whoever could run - the sick ones with the fever could run - but the ones that were just going through the crisis  they couldnt.
I was very sick alre ady when I was three years old.
But when we went -- I think it was some sort of extermination -- we thought it might be a contagious sickness so they sent her to the sick barrack.
As I mentioned before  my mother was getting more sick by the day  swollen from not eating.
And I was very sick at heart myself  I was very upset.
And you know  we were scared to tell them that we are sick because doesn't matter what.
And when the farmers people  somebody used to get sick  they used to come to us  and the mother used to help them  to take them to the hospital.
25 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD They took me in.
So this was– when we first came to Auschwitz  we didnt have that.
This is something if you get old and you get sick you die.
And then we came to Lagedi and I really felt terribly sick.
I used to go to the other sick people and sing for them songs that I remembered from my childhood.
First one masseuse and then the other friend of mine  the one who was the head of that very sick ward.
You're going to sick  02:18: 21 like I would care. (
I would have never come here to the United States  because my broth -- my ol der brother encouraged me  he needed me  he -- whatever he -- he was sick  and so on.
And I think I got a little bit sick to my stomach but I didn't cry.
I was also sick  but some were really in bad shape.
At that time  I gained some weight but after a while the Germans got tired of it and they took away with the transport all the sick people  the block was liquidated and we went back.
Now  my mother was in she was sick  she had fever  she was in very  very bad shape  because she had gone to to Kremasta to recuperate from her ordeals  and now  all of a sudden  she has to go up to the mountains again.
He if a kid was sick he would go by and pat him.
When we got off in Auschwitz  first of all in that time when I was taking the water there was a couple of dead children already  which I took them out and there was somebody going through with a carriage or wagon and I put them in the wagon because there was a lot of sick children already and they caught already.
Because when I talk about the ghetto  I I I really get sick.
And th e first thing the girls did -- I was too sick  slaughter a cow  or sa -- or a -- or something  or [indecipherable] just to get some f -- real good food into us.
O-Or  he was sick and died  or he had a stroke and died.
And this is how the camp was liberated from that um  at  at that time  and um  they um picked me up and wrapped me up in a blanket  and they took me into the uh showers  and the inmates  the Germans that they caught  they ma de them uh put white uniforms on and  and they took care of the inmates who were very  very sic k  who needed care right away  and they had built a hospital outside of uh  uh Bergen-Belsen to uh put those terrible sick people and to help them to uh bring them back to health  and this is how th ey wrapped me up in a blanket and showered me and cleaned me  the German SS did that  and th en brought me into that uh hospital  and uh  I understand  um  Canadian doctor who looked at my leg  and I could see in his face that my leg was terrible  and he said  uh  he had a translator  and in French  they told me they were going to try and save my leg  and um  afterwards I found out th at I had gangrene in my leg  and he almost amputated that leg  and I was still fighting for 2 months in that hospital because I still had the typhus  and this is in the conditions that they found me.
Or somebody -- even -- she even mentioned maybe he had the -- a little money  and maybe somebody killed him  or he died -- or he died because he was sick  is what -- Interview with Michael Lin February 27  2000 47 So you never got any definite information?
When I red arrived to the foster family  after I was beginning getting to be very sick in my he ad.
And my brother was sick and father was also not so from working  you know  and he was a and again  but again there was a raid and the Americans bomb again  a raid and the Americans were bombing -- Munich is not far away from Dachau -- and a bomb came in right not too far away from the camp and I just jumped.
Interview with George Pisik July 14  1993 34 And when we went back to the United States  I was on sick call and they put me in the hospital  the and they put hot compresses on my feet for a week and they painted my feet with potassium permangana te.
And it was this Francis who I remember  because she did no t get sick as I did  when I was so sick toward the end of my stay in Bergen-Belsen that she just was just a very uncaring person  at least as far as I was concerned.
He came over to German authority in this camp and told him  look in order to take care of all the sick people  I need this and this and this medication and this equipment.
And  uh  the ones who were very sick we moved out into field hospitals and  uh  some of those that stayed were trying to help us get the records to find out and to check on how many people were killed and to keep track of everything and we had some of the people working there because they didn't want to go home.
Like they took all the sick people  when we stood in the sorting shed  and sorted the things from the people  the belongings  and you see the lorries   the wagons  go by  and the older people  or children who were maybe orphans or  were thrown in like cabbage  and then at the end rid es Gomerski [ NB: SS-Scharfuhrer Hubert Gomerski]  who was in charge of them  with a pistol  and just asks  \ Who is tired  and who cannot work  and who is sick?
And it was very crowded and there were peop le sick  people having children.
29 When the news were bad  the message was  the patie nt is very sick.
And then I took a train to Liverpool and I went on the Empress of France where I was deathly sick to Canada.
He got very sick  his legs were swollen and of course he was killed and cremate -- I mean he was -- he went out like everybody else  through the chimney.
So I begged the soldiers that look  my child is so sick.
I stayed in bed from months at a time  putting white powder on my face to tell people that I was sick.
Most recently  she has been out on sick leave but hopes to return in July.
When people came  women  particularly young women came to him with begging for some favor  like for a sick person to get some medicine  or what n -- extraordinary thing  they had to pay.
Th at lasted until the end of March but in the meantime I became sick with typhoid fever.
You know when a tree is sick  he always gave an injection and made the tree well.
>> Bill B enson: If you had become sick or anything like that  you couldn't get access to healthcare?
He came  they came home to Poland with his mother and the brother was sick.
Bu t we were sick and I  especially  was very ill.
Now you 17 could ask for sick leave...sick leave...you could ask not to go to work for one day but it was very dangerous because when you came to the sick bay and then you went.... I was so weak I stayed in bed and I didn't want to go .
Oh yeah  a long  late  when I was in New Yo rk  for a long time when we went through the Lincoln Tunnel  I felt sick.
18 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD So it was -- I don't remember being scared or upset.
The mother was sick then  he was the youngest boy -- y-youngest child in his family and she was taking care of him.
No  I did not know in the beginning but after I saw that they took sick and old people to resettle  I am a very gullible person.
He later on wrote that he was very sick  lost a tremendous amount of weight  and put in -- we wouldnt recognize him again.
No  we were not searched  but just the thought of it made me sick in my stomach after we left.
I came here as a form er tuberculosis patient  almost dying there and I havent been sick a day since I came here.
And during this time there was some -- some effort made at -- at ca -- well  actually the effort made to contact us ha-happened be -- prior to the time I got sick.
He was 28 kilo and was very sick  tuberculosis  diarrhea  etc.
After we stopped in one place before Flossenburg  Weiden I asked the fellow who was on the train  give me hot water a little bit because I am very sick.
The [indecipherable] smell was making us sick  not the -- not the [indecipher able] smelling food sometime  because we had been -- we had -- the food that we had eaten for -- for a long time was just bread  mainly  and some ba -- bayjay -- whats the -- what cows eat they cooked in there  and they gave them  and so on.
I got very sick one night and I had excruciating pain.
And the next day  the whol e hospital will be evacuated  with the sick  you know  to get away with them.
I was sick all the way  all the way to Vienna.
What did you - what went through your h ead when you saw these selections and people being killed because they were sick  or for some other reason?
But what happened was the Swedish Red Cross agreed on taking in the very sick ones to Sweden and we were lucky and we were picked because we were very sick.
Father was sick  and I couldnt get the medi cal help for him.
He came home running -- he came home with a satche l from a patient and his wife told him to -- th -- they were here looking for you because they need 12 doctors  and they need for some camp which -- I dont know  its just the -- you know  excuse  I would ge -- to make them feel good  that theyre going to help sick people.
Just like anybody who didn't have shoes  or who was sick.
Not when I got sick   when -- I-I was in Bergen-Belsen for a few weeks in the hospital because I got typhoid  its a high fever  and -- What was your physical condition at the time of liberation?
When you kind of stay up so fast  so he have  ﬁYou sick.
They took young people  babies  children  old people  sick people  everybody  the whole families.
I have to have a couple of times  because I was so sick  I couldn't walk  I couldn't talk  nothing.
Then  when my brother was so sick in the ghetto  I -- I was sometimes spending the night at the neighbors.
Then she was sick for a long time  and she died.
Im -- The reason Im going back is because I want to tell you that I got sick  okay?
See  not only that  but there s there must have been a hospital or someplace to to take sick.
Hospitals had more food so it wasn't because of the sick you came here  the hospital was not because of the sick.
And she  she helped my grandfather a little bit in  with the patients and always was interested helping the sick.
So I managed--paying a good money--to be retired as being a sick man; and from this position  after a couple of years  I emigrate to America.
My father never went because he had stomach pr oblems  he had ulcers  he was very sick.
They give a little potatoes  a little beans  a little flour  you know  until some...one house to houses  we made something and we...they gave this to the poor  you know  that they should have for the...and there was a lot of sick people.
And they just came to the houses  apartments  knew exactl y where to go a nd took everybody away : old people  young people  sick people  everybody ; happened twice  at the end of August.
She opened the door and said mis -- Dr. Rosenzeuk  take in this woman because she is sick.
9 The orphanage  the elderly  the sick  the children from many families  and many  many people that came to their home last and there was no more room in the ghetto--they were put into the city synagogues  in the shulen  as we called it  within the shul.
I think when he...when he found me...uh... I don't know that he found me  but he was...he carried me as soon as the British organized themselves  the first thing they did  they removed the sick people.
And there was the Selektion for the gas chambers one time  and we were standing outside and this SS man told me to go in one direction and my mother into another because I looked so sick.
But for some reason they had promised the Germans they would hand over all the Jews so they didn't want to give us exit permits.
And I told her  I said  \ I believe Mother is sick and I would like to take her to the barrack.\
Happens to be from my time when I came out the  most people got sick there  but not didn't die  but the most trains cam e in and people were laying dead.
And the sick camp was that you had those German cuts that was like 30 inches wide.
I at this point had lost one aunt  the other one was also very sick.
Now in my particular  as I told you  the first units went through  they really gave us crumbs of bread I remember just and saying  ah we don't have ourselves  and we don't want to give you too much so you don't get sick.
That one of our friends will say  \ Well  we came to Auschwitz.
And I was -- I-I left in hospital  because sick people and people who work in hospital stay  the other people who can walk  go for march.
Then I got sick of Typhus there and that Robert who took me back he told a soldier that he should bring m e every day water there and keep me -- I was in a little coop like  and you have to keep give her water and make a little fire to keep her warm and she is going to be okay.
So we went in in the boat in there  and of course  after being so hungry all those years  I was watching to eat because I shouldnt get sick again.
25 Yeah  right  and he couldnt   he couldnt --- he was very sick.
Well  I had four sisters  two brothers  and my mother and father.
When we came out  I was laying in bed sick  my wife  my father was layi ng in bed sick  and at once my oldest brother handed me a little note.
And I must have been very sick because I remember very little.
And he was so worried about me  because when I was sick  he didnt get undressed.
And I understand that once a doctor walked thro ugh a hospital and with a group of student doctors  and he asked them  which of these patients is the most sick  you know  the sickest person.
Now  did your brother get sick at the same time as you  or a little bit afterwards?
Were you sick on the boat all the time  or did you also -- Sure. --
I have no idea how long I was in that hospital  how long I was sick.
To the Polish officers  to the Polish doctors  to the Polish secretaries  so that they made themselves sick and they write and they are sick and they cannot serve.
From that time on until I married  I was always in Grimmenstein with he r. Then when she was nineteen  she got sick.
And  um  also  Mengele was sick  or had a cold or something  so he wasn't available to do his usual selections.
But that made me that year being sick  sort of made my body ma physically also very weak  and thin.
So they they took me  and I was very sick  I got diarrhea and they took me to a hospital they call Bad Ischl.
There was woods and cemetery not too far away  and they put all the people  everybody young and old and not sick  everybody have to be there.
And after  you know  when they came over here  was warm and another kind of everything  you know  the the you know  the [indecipherable] and the food  and and disease  all kinds  you know  the we been sick for that thi oh  ye oh my goodness  what is in English  I dont know.
That I was the hunger that overpowered the even second thought  ﬁShould I pick up this core?ﬂ Because after all it was on the road and it could have been thrown away by some sick person  and it could have been the  the god only knows  dogs could have been over it and whatever.
In one letter my father writes that he had pneumonia  and was very  very sick  he was always a big man.
But the ones that were left were the ones that were too sick to march  and they killed most of those when whe-when when we when we moved into the there they killed most of those  and then left.
So I was that then I get sick  so I stopped that.
First of all  eh the next day we were given too much food to eat.
And my sister wanted to know all the details what happened and from then on  we...my sister got very sick with typhus and had to go to the hospital...go to the hospital and the hospital  they did a lot of experiments so I was...I was afraid that she should leave me so she went there for a little while  but we met someone who really took pity on me because I was about the youngest member in the whole com...in...in the barrack.
So  I remember that when Mother got very sick and the doctor came to see her you know  we had Jewish doctors in town and they all were friends.
So I remember once in the first of February  1945  they killed that night  400 sick people out of 700  about 300 only made it  could run.
A matter of fact I got sick from one of the children  they had a lot of problems with eye infections.
And I got so sick that I really begged them to take me away.
And these were all young people and women and ch ildren and old and sick.
Dont eat th is  dont eat this or you may get sick.
And Chuck says  ﬁI have very sad news for you.ﬂ And I said  ﬁWhat?ﬂ I thought he might have gotten sick again and then I would have gone out to be with him.
We were so sick that after th e big barn  the gates of the big barn  after they were open  people burst out and started to run  but we were so weak that we couldnt even run and on top of everything  there was wet snow around and I didnt have shoes.
Incidentally  the friend of mine who was so sick in ghetto that we gave some food to  all of us  a little bit of ours  she was taken away to Auschwitz.
So  the Nazis took out the cigarettes and chocolate and distributed the rest of the food crackers  sardines  whatever was there  which was okay  maybe it was better  because otherwise we would have gotten sick  God knows what  and then Renia  Hania knowing what was going on and Renia sensing from that woman for whom she worked that someth ing is going to happen soon  all of a sudden is very patronized by that woman.
So the sick people were sent back to Vaihingen an der Enz and all the people who were not sick enough was sent out to camp Kochendorf.
And -- a-an -- but then I -- but then we became both  very soon too  she became very sick and I became sick.
I says  ﬁWhy to her?ﬂ She says  ﬁBecause I was sick and she took me to the hospital.ﬂ So we packed and we 34 came right back.
And I helped my husband  and we were there for for almost 40 years  until my husband took sick  and my husband died in 2000.
Margaret got sick and she had to have a brain surgery  which she had in New Jersey  where she owned a little house  and unfortunately she never recovered properly and my da ughters looked after her a nd took her to a place in Arizona  where they both lived.
Was a convent hospital  and my father was apparently ve ry sick  which I didnt know any more  because we had left.
My father and I got very sick crossing the English channel.
It is...it is some kind of...I don't know what it is...that all the childrens get sick after that.
So when -- how did -- did you write to them first  or did you just walk up to the door  sick as you were?
An d they tried to isolate them in one corner of this car  and my mother was going ab solutely falling apart  because I mean  she was brave  but she was carrying on quite a bit because he was so sick.
He said...uh...he said...on Germany  he talked to us  ....if we are healthy  if are sick  or something  is sorting out.
Interview with Al Jaffee May 21  2016 82 Everybody was a little sick.
I had a brother who was five and a half years older than me and in the beginning of the war  he got sick and due to bad conditions  he could not be properly diagnosed.
They confuse the number  somehow they confuse the number of the sick people minus less  minus one  and I got away.
I had a sister  and Im one the sick sister  and myself  and she and the mother  we were four people.
So sure enough he came with me and we  and the man was a very sick man.
The worst thing  they were very small kids  pregnant women  older people  sick people.
He was very sick  I have no money for doctor and my -- that other family that I told you that they were very nice and kind would come an-and -- and -- and visit us and -- and my husband was trying to get a job  but h-he couldn't -- i-it was very hard to get that time a job as a dental technician and we cannot get nothing  you know  to the hires.
There was this second action was in March  I believe  in 1943 and this action was to eliminate all sick  elderly people and children 27 from Ghetto.
I think he -- he had some sort of a sick leave  he had a slight injury.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 6 >> Suzy Snyder: Do you know why?
When I went...we never should tell them that we are sick; because when you're sick  you're dead.
You know  used by night used to come in and they couldn't  some of them couldn't move  you know  sick.
There were some bad times  sometimes he was very sick but all in all he  in the end of the war  he was much better than a few years earlier.
I got very sick  and I walked out  then I knew for sure that I didn't have any parents anymore.
It was a lousy year to come to the States  1929  my father got sick  he got tuberculosis  and so on  everything went wrong.
Once you say yo u si -- you sick  youre going.
And they fed me  and and I went to work in a fur shop  because I knew how to sew.
And when the ship started to sail the next day  I got very sick.
A nurse came out and told me not to think about my brother anymore  and also said  ﬁYou should eat your potato.ﬂ During the night  a truck had come to take the very sick ones who could not work anymore  and they were killed.
And I have malaria  and and she took me to  you know  give me some medicine.
So then they picked kids to go  the sick kids  some of them went to Sweden.
8 People got terribly sick with various diseases because the sanitary conditions were non-existent.
And so I thought that maybe to but he got sick and shortly after the war in 1946  he die.
There was four of them like this and they used to bring the horses there  and they would bring the people from the ghetto and kill the horses and slaughter them and put them in the other place and cut it apart and give it to the -- there was meat and some of the horses I'm sure were sick.
And so  they died very soon  a lot of them died very soon and got sick and it -- for the food alone  what you got at Sobibor  you couldnt live.
Interview with Brooks McClure July 7  2011 20 Oh well  I was I was not drafted yet  and I guess I had a slightly preferential rating  because I had al besides my father  who was very sick  I had three women to take care of in the immediate family.
People  when they took sick  they used to go to their hometown  back to their own doctor.
Yes  and I was very -- I didnt even talk about -- but still in Ereda  I became very sick.
You know  we work right there as people come down from the museum  and she was a -- she was a mature lady and she came down and I see her cry  so I thought maybe she got sick  so I took a chair and gave it to her to sit down and sh-she just you kn ow  goes back and forth.
I remember punching my chest to make red spots because I know my brother was sick of the typhus in ghetto that the symptoms for typhus is red spots on the chest.
No  I I I had like pity  because he was so sick.
If the first home  you know  which was so loving and so kind  okay  has another child  then and they cant handle it  and then the second home  you know  one half of the pil one pillar from the family gets sick  that means that you know  they theyre for the best of will  you know  they still are theyre not able to fully integrate a child.
And this -- these peasants were so [indecipherable] that they told -- arranged really  to put me as a sick man on the carriage  that they will pull me  and I will give them only cigarettes.
I couldnt -- I couldnt even go near the -- the -- the dining room  thats how darn sick I was.
Very few men or no men except when they're really sick.
They are mentally sick and they were thrown into this camp because they had to be kept away from -- otherwise why would they be behind that -- behind what?
Now  uh  the only way we could get in there was that our Red Cross People  Swedish Red Cross  went in.
And he got sick on the train and they threw him off in Avignon  in France  where he  who had never le arned two words of a foreign language  he acquired some French and worked there -- and English  I guess too -- worked there with the American -- the authorities who came up the Rhone Valley and eventually he made his way back to Baden-Baden  where they -- he became police chief and had a -- I USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0077 9think for 10 years he was that  and then he retired and everybody was happy with their Jewish police chief.
They wanted to take the Red Cross  wanted to take them to Sweden.
And th -- another friend with [indecipherable] about my wife when she wa s sick in the -- Jerusalem  he passed away two years ago.
They took out mostly those who were sick and by that time I was pretty sic k. And Binna and I  and a few other people  there was a girl  Franya Gilman   sh e was also on our truck.
And we go there  and first time we was selected  and women on the si -- si -- one side  and men on the other side  and I was lucky  thank God  my sister Wanda was also sick  something o -- who knows?
And  of course  on that truck there were people  you know  very sick people going  you know  they were throwing sick people there and...and...and these children that gave them a tough time.
It was only at the moment of the deportation when the Germans arrested us  that one of the sisters in charge of the school  the Mother Superior  came and said to the Germans that my mother was sick and was not very well and if she could stay because she had to get treatment and then they would send her afterward.
71 So just give me the chronology  do you -- you got sick and then were you taken out of the concentration camp to a separate hospital?
The same kapo for whom I worked earlier returned from the Auschwitz sick bay  where he was confined with typhus  and was given a new work crew to dig foundations and help in the construction of crematoria three and four.
As we worked -- as I worked ever d -- at this job [indecipherable] time  I really got sick from that.
And then his temperature went up and up and up  and then it turned out that two other children in town apparently had scarlet fever  and it turned out it was scarlet fever  but it really wasnt diagnosed in time  and in time for the doctor to say  ﬁGo to the nearest town ﬂ which was 25 kilometers from us  or ﬁLets go get penicillin someplace ﬂ and apparently he had a weak heart  and he was sick for three days and he died.
You got sick  you died  that was the end of it.
I had one but it...from this I couldn't live and after many attempts to...after many attempts to to find some way of uh ma...making a living which I couldn't do  I I found a job as I told you before in western France  again as a teacher in a family  in an aristocratic refuge family and I I decided to go there and but you you could only travel at this time with a special permit  de voyage it was called so I went to the police and asked for a de voyage and they told me why why you want to go there and I said my aunt is sick because...it wasn't very cleaver but I had no better...nothing better in mind  so uh they didn't give it.
So one day  see  I said to myself  \ I am sick.
And she said  ﬁI never was as sick in the camp as I was that night.ﬂ And finally she found some relief in the morning by throwing up.
If I feel anything -- and that it -- religion  and this is interesting because it comes out when I'm very sick or when there is major disaster  I pray and I was raised also in a Dutch reformed school environment  so I am basically Calvinist  but I've had Catholic boyfrie nds  Jewish boyfriends  so that's -- but I feel very  very  very un-Jewish.
So I wrote down  for instance  Arwin Donohue got sick on June the 22nd.
Because when they came to count us  they were also looking us over because if anybody looked sick or older than what they thought or weak  they would just take him right out and off they went to the crematorium again.
When I say ﬁwe ﬂ again it 's the two ladies  got a letter from which they forwarded it to us where somebody el se wrote in his name he was too sick to write the letter himself pleading for some warm clothes.
Well  you know  you are so weak  and in general and youre really the merak you are you are sick all over  I mean  its something which I could say  its its a miracle thing which people survived after that  because we all were by all miracle  you know  by all how shall I say medicine would not help us the way we were looking.
He says  that was dog meat what you are eati ng  and thats what you got sick.
Gina got sick and she died  you know  before the Polish uprising.
She -- I guess if you were sick you didnt go to school  it was as simp le as that.
And after the war  I don't know why they found 19 ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT VERBATIM RECORD out that I got sick  you know  that there was something wrong with my arms.
And did then also after some days  the possibility to approach the other prisoners also sick and console and strengthen them.
You're sick or whatever it is  everybody is calm  composed  and you will not realize.
But I -- I was quite sick  otherwise they would have never had the permission to put me there.
So uh Dr. Elkes tried to squeeze out fr om Roka what is the re al reason for ordering thirty thousand people  old and young  sick and healthy  uh babies in in in the arms of their...children...why do they have to go to the court?
I was taking care of her and she was so sick that they took her in the hospital and she died.
I worked for them almost from the first day  although I was sick a great deal.
Yes  and sometimes in the afternoons  and then when my f -- my brother got sick with typhus  I was not allowed to go there for awhile  because it was disinfected  and my mother didnt want me to come there.
I -- I remember I got sick from the cold weather  I ha -- I had -- I had ne -- pneumonia.
And her husband -- she was very lonely  she was a sick woman.
And my brother-in-law was a doctor  you know  help her when she was sick  etcetera  etcetera.
Dont stay here in the hospital.ﬂ We used to see trucks coming and they would pile on the trucks sick people.
ML: Im -- I got sick with -- I had a problem with my knee  I couldnt walk  so they fired me.
Typhus  it is a completely... It is like here in the United States Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever; but it was in the worst type of this type of sick... of uh  diseases.
But 49 once  when you were sick  like when you had typhus - first of all  when you had this high fever  this very high fever  you burned like anything  and even if you were delirious and you were contagious  you werent as sick as during the crisis - when the crisis came  when your temperature went right down  you couldnt move  and this was - if you survived the crisis  you lived.
Her husband would be...who knows  you know  so she was extremely anxious and she became sick.
After two weeks I was transferred to Auschwitz thanks to my cousins because they were first in Auschwitz and they noticed from the list obtained from Schreibshtuber that I was in transport and they took me under pretext that I am sick.
45 And I make some friends in concentration camp who help me  because otherwise  if you are sick  you were selected right away to crematorium.
If the people were diagnosed as Typhus  patient  they were killed with injections.
A friend of mine was very sick in this hospital  and somebody come  you know  the  between the hospital and the crematorium  in this camp  where they assort th e clothes  they had some uh covers  like this  covered on the uh  oh on the wires so nobody can see  look through.
And often there was cases  like ... Like I told you  people were sick  you tried to help them.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 15 So soon the trains were opened from the outside.
So my father got sick so we send my father to Shawnitz.
And it must have been just a few hundred calories a day because everybody was getting sick.
And they didnt give y -- us too much  because they said -- they -- they spoke German  so they said not to eat too much because we going to get very sick  and we going to have to go to the -- to -- to the Riviera -- the Rivera -- the -- you know  the -- th-the hospital  because you going to get sick to our stomachs  and our stomachs are not used to those -- the food  and its different than -- than in the concentration camp.
I was more sick than alive because I am a celiac on top of that .
I couldnt get that since I was still a typhoid carrier and I was too weak and too sick.
And when I was sick and my husban d died  she would call me from France and Israel twice a week and she really can' t afford it.
And it was so cold  and there was no heating  and she said  ﬁWillie  come in in bed  its so cold.ﬂ And I said to her  ﬁThere is something with Hein ﬂ it was that horrible feeling again that I go t. I said  ﬁWhat is today the date?ﬂ She said  ﬁJanuary 20.ﬂ I said  ﬁWhen he comes back  Im sure hes very   very sick  and that I have to ask him if he was sick.ﬂ And that was the night he died  and I heard that later.
Interview with Brooks McClure July 7  2011 6 So  at any rate  he was a wonderful old man  and but he he got very  very sick.
We are trying to teach the children in the school and we are trying to take care of the sick people and we tried to build a life and we have now our own camp police.
My Aunt Pearl became sick w ith Typhus and was delirious  fell on the floor.
My heart  I wa s sick  I was  I was very sick.
I had to go home  put to bed  was really sick.
Can you just tell us a little bit about what it was like a-as she got sick?
And then he got exhausted and sick and tired and beaten up into the...into the barracks.
I was maybe 13 or so  and he was getting shots and he was so sick.
Did you get sick Interview with Mira Zimmerman January 23  2015 47 Mother and ssome man go t together and  quote  robbed a a storage of white beets.
Then another time  which I vaguely remember  I was sick  and I had been sent to a hospital in Paris.
It probably saved my life because a lot of people ate and not havi ng eaten for a long time  just gorged themselves and got quite sick and many of them died.
And we used to get two slices of bread a day in rations when I was in the barracks before I got sick.
Sick people  even a woman that just had a child had to come with the baby there.
Did he discover that you were sick or did he discover that you made up the story?
Put my Aunt Rose into the hospital there because she was very  very sick.
Sometimes  she was sick  had the heart condition and so on  and s-some my father had the military doctor  so but y ou know those military doctors  they didnt think much of them.
And fi nally Manasha -- Manasha took sick and there was no doctor up there and when he got well he decided to go back home.
The -- I'm sure the reaction of the guys was that  if there was no resistance  we had to do something with these sick and dying people.
If hes sick  he has t p. He said to me  meister Schultz  sh --  sh --.
It was very lucky for me that I couldn't eat .
The minute I entered -- on the boat  everybody was sick.
I told you my father got sick  he was a [indecipherable] eight childrens  so we had to try to bring a little bit income in.
There were four women in the washing rooms and we were washing blankets from dead people or sick people and all the dirty clothes that were from the people who had died  also from diseases  with li ce and withŠ We were obliged to wash about 60 blankets a day.
I was lucky because people really weren't mass sent to concentration camps at that time.
There were quite a bit of smells because people always died  and then they laid there for a little while until someone rem oved them.
And once I got out of being sick  I went specially and and and to another barrack where they had certain diseases of skin  and I got it myself  so that it was very unpleasant  very horrible  but that kept me from going to the to the so I survived  but I was skin and bones at the end  and depressed  and I really wanted to die there.
I don't know how long I was sick  but then other children started arriving and then we all were again a large enough group for us to continue and by small stages -- then I remember being on busses  and they got us out from C zechoslovakia.
They threw me back into the ghetto  they could have killed me on the spot.
Their stomachs couldn't accept or whatever it was they got sick from.
So in 1944 -- you know  I had nothing to wear  because we lived in a s -- I -- I -- actually  I was sick for three years with malaria  right?
My daughter got sick  she got tuberculosis  which runs in the family  and almost died in the hospital.
But he adored working day and night with the sick people.
But I found out in Rupertstein   he was sick on TB  too.
I was very happy to go there but my wife was very sick.
Everybody got sick   but I didn't so I was on the boat.
I don't know  I remember that I was sick for two days after that  I was staying in bed and I was crying all the ti me.
And I was working there until I got sick  so they took me out  because with the in the tunnels Le-Lets okay  well get to that in a minute.
But I was pushing  I was getting up in the morning  dressing  but I could not help myself  very sick.
I was tired and hungry and dirty and sleepy and...because it was not a very pleasant place.
But then I myself fell into it; because being always in touch with those sick people  I also got typhoid.
I dont know if you know anybody  when people are this sick  that for example they have movements in their leg  which is just nothing.
Actually  she was a woman who was taking care for my mother b ecause my mother was very ill for one hour and a half  so she took her --.
I was Dad's girl  but she was very...and she wrote me that Mom is very sick and medicine.
I said to him  look  look  how my heart is--I'm sick.
We were standing outside watching how the sick people and the people are burn...are burning up...the whole ghetto.
I was very sick in the forest  and this I was told by my mother.
The minute you got sick a little bit  you were taken out  and we alot of times when we went out to work and maybe 2 000 people  and the men says I only want 1 800 back and by the time we got back  we had trucks behind us that they killed off the rest of them.
And the ones that -- So you were already there for -- how long before liberation were you in the sick bay?
He had eleven surgeries  he had cancer in his testicle s. And he was sick for about six or seven years.
They were all -- everybody that went to work  except if you were sick  they used to -- one day they used to give you permission to stay.
I was going to make E9  but I got sick and I got medically retired before I actually got promoted.
They was a little sick  you know  and we have to take them out  and they sit outside the place.
I-I sti ll have scars fr-from this  and my father was very sick  too  he had a lot of those abscesses.
My father got sick early on so I ran a business.
And I couldnt eat because I felt more like giving everything out  I was still sick.
And I start to vomit blood  and I got sick with a high temperature.
Did someone get sick and they needed to . . .
Icek is sick with typhus in a hospital  this one here.
You didn't want to get sick because if you got sick and you couldn't work  they had every months transported  transports that picked you up and you were gone and never heard of again.
So  he was sick mostly  but in the Russian time  they took tremendously care of their soldiers [indecipherable] here.
We knew that clothes came back to the ghetto from the people who were deported  the old and the sick people and people had foreboding that nothing good comes and they prob ably perish but they didnt know that systematic extermination and this.
So he put me in the so called sick... sick...uh...place  and there I got twice a day soup.
We have the Red Cross report  and my father (sic) was in a -- like a ghetto  a small ghetto  and I don't recall exactly where  but he was sick and he was old so he just probably passed away in there  don't have any real documentati on on him.
My sister's uh suffering from that uh to a point that she was very sick because she has a guilt feeling that she lived  that if she would not give my mother the child  my mother would probably still be alive.
Everybody got sea sick  the boat was an old  old fishing boat that the Israe li government brought from  bought from Greece and it was a primitive thing  very primiti ve.
We're going to dance on that ship  but I was so sick - she says that I was begging for a little dry ice  but I came to America  and I had  I had feelings in America that I I came to the right country.
People succeeded to smuggle in some sick  some elderly  some children even younger than me.
And at the time my sister  Miriam  she was very sick and they had her in the dispensary over there.
The last column was called and many people fall on a...they they want to be sick  you know...they don't want to go  and they start shooting  you know.
Also there  some people  some girls get sick from the food because they  they give us very dietetic food in the quarantine and even with that  some girls get sick and they were transported to the hospitals.
Because he couldnt eat his soups because he was sick  so I gave him my piece of bread.
43 02:55:55 My only advice is was not to be hitten  and try the best not to get sick  because people used to grab anything they can  me too.
He was a couple of years older than he  a nd he fall in love with her  and he was taking care of her very -- I -- very much  even when she was very  very sick.
And the histor ical pictures from the girls laying in the hospital  the girls [indecipherable] which they now you can see them in the museum  which I gave a whole book fr just from Volary with my friends being in bed sick  they are now there  these historical pictures.
You're on the day shift now since the time you were sick  you're on the day shift?
I received no help or sympathy from the people in the sick bay; they had more serious injuries to deal with.
You see  we had some Jews living on  next to the farm and we came to visit them and they were in a very poor and very dirty -- and evidently some of the lice traveled from them to me and I got sick and I was very close to death because typhus is a terrible disease.
You had to have -- there was -- there was hospitals  there was sick people  there was people in typhus.
All I know is take care of the sick  and the wounded.
I've got some really sick kids in there  and the doctor put a sign on there \ quarantined.\
And  went to United States  first job was his first job was going from the army camp to army camp in the States   he got 50 dollar for each talk  then he said  I got sick of these things and everything.
And I was so sick that they put me there already.
I was afraid to be sick because I thought they probably going to kill everybody there  not to be witnesses  which is it happened.
I want to tell you th at after the liberation  I was very sick  that why.
He was still in bed because he was a little sick and he didn't have (his) papers.
I had to go to church every Sunday  and at Christmas it was very difficult because the Polish people had a ceremonial Christmas Eve and we were invited to this [she laughs] to a very important person there  you know  for Christmas dinner and I had to pretend that I am really very sick and cannot make it at the last minute.
You know  a lot of people -- of my friend cant talk  they get very sick  they dont want to hear about it.
I landed -- I landed in Canada after being sea sick.
We came to a barn full of people  dead people  sick people  horses  chickens.
And he wa -- he was very -- very  very sick and thank God it was  you know  penicillin that was discover  and my father was a -- wa s one of the first one  almost  who got penicillin injection.
So what happened  they finally took us out by train and shipped us to Auschwitz.
Well  sick bay  there was no -- at least you were out of work then  you know?
When a pris oner died in the bunk  everybody jump to looking for the piece of bread  because she have the bread  she cannot eat on it because she so sick.
One people -- once people got sick  you had to dispose of them  you see?
Bergen was farther  the brick buildings  and this is where they took the sick people.
And I was truly sick because it was poison and affected all my glands.
We came to there barrack and we see a lot of elderly people  sick people and so on.
Took me back to the barrack and asking me to go up and three tier of  three rows of bed which were built  one on top of the others  exactly the one you have at yo ur museum  asking  I had Typhus and I was very sick  asking me to go up and down and up and down and up and down several times.
The only Jewish family in that little town uh that had come back took him in  and that also became a life-long friendship because uh shortly after they took him in  while he was waiting for the necessary travel papers to make the best of his trip north  he got si...he got very sick and died in a period of days  and here they had the body of this stranger on their hands whom they really didn't know much about except some rough idea where the rest of his family was.
After your you know  when youre in this village  and you and your mother work  and your sister is telling fortunes and getting you know  shes getting sick and and then is relieved from having to work like you and your mother  I want to find out what happens then.
This is -- this is with what I'm going to -- to live in an empty house with -- with a sick child and with people that care so much  that never came even to -- to wait for us.
At that time  dont forget the first w eek  we didnt know the extent  what happened with Auschwitz and all the sick  Kelman and all this c oncentration camp.
So the -- then they said  ﬁKurt  how many sick?ﬂ I said  ﬁEight.ﬂ In most cases  they accepted my number  but sometimes they went to the barracks and all the sick one had to come out  to double check  and that Fransel did it that way  and Wagner  he never let them come out  but I had to come with him to the door of the barracks and call the name  and the sick one had to answer  to make sure that there is no cheating.
They gave a ship and I think the Red Cross  I dont know  they took them to Sweden.
Even though in your tapes you do talk about that poin t where Albert Speer gets sick and he doesn't see Hitler for awhile and as he explains it  he's pulled out of his sphere of influence and then when he sees him again  so mething has changed.
She told me she left her husband sick in bed  but he has her husband was dying  and in al in in and in outsid e she saw young people staying in a line  so she left her husband and she went down.
The population was told to bring all the infirm  all 10 the sick ones  all the very old ones to the hospital.
At that time  you  were you so sick it was hard for you to even get up?
And apparently the Russians had treat treated them allowed them to organize the camp well  the camp was already organized under the Germ ans  but now they treated them with great respect  and they looked after the sick.
And if you dont feel optimism about that fact  all the money in the bank isnt going to help you if youre sick.
And what I found out  actually it was in 1991  and I found out that when my mother got sick  that my American girlfriend didnt stick out with me  but this woman  whom I met only two or three week s earlier  did.
And the last time I visited Israel in November  and I si -- I took him to th e Dead Sea  to -- I knew he is sick  to give him some good time together  becau se my younger sister  who was so spoiled by us  we were taking care of her as a child  has no feelings.
My mother became sick from not eating  from being sick  whatever.
ﬁI was in the Polish uprising  my husband is in Germany and my child is very sick  I have no money.
It was fall  the hurrican es are there  and near Ireland we ran into a hurricane  and Dan  who claimed he was never sick on ships  got very sick on a ship.
And then I went -- before that  I went in 93  when I was so sick and I couldn't walk yet  I was in a wheelchair  a nd my granddaughter took me because my husband was very much against it  my sist er was against it  everybody was against it except my oldest granddaughter wasnt against it.
But if you were sick more than one day  they used to take you away and you never came back.
an-and you did say that you dont kno w exactly -- was he already sick at that time?
All of (500) when I had fever  it didnt show too muc h. Fever and sick  sick  so I was scared.
But I remember it was a frightening experience  because you know at that time was already -- right before this my brother got sick before we went to Uzbekistan.
But I went and he said  he worked for your father  your father had -- I said  yes  my father in that time wa s sick and he couldnt work by himself  and he took this person for -- and I remember him very well.
Children  sick people  old people  and they died  and people trampled over them.
And we were in with a sick grandmother  my mother  and two of us.
And the day he died  before the age of 12 or about  I suddenly became the old man of the family  and I had to take care not only of five grown-up sisters of mine and a constantly sick mother  but I had to take care of four horses and six cows and 12 chickens and porcupines.
Uh my mother worked in this uh infirmary and it was a good thing because uh somewhere along the way my brother got to be ve ry sick.
ROUGH DRAFT TRANSCRIPT NOT A VERBATIM RECORD 28 So in the morning the train comes by.
And the sa -- the -- the sailors kind of took pity on me  and they would bring me an occas ional piece of fruit or so -- the food on this boat was all spoiled.
And in -- in Auschwitz  I was in -- in a -- when the camp started to be liquidated  the doctors didn t want to go  they wanted to have a full sick camp  to be -- to say that we are needed  you got a full camp here  you know  sick bar -- sick barrack.
And my mother was afraid that she said if I get Interview with Ursala Guttstadt McKinney 50 sick I cant communicate.
The only time you could stay in the sick room if you had fever  and I stayed there for a few days and they bandaged my hand and put some grease and she managed to give me a job when I got back.
I was sick for half an hour and tried to recovered.
And he had another gentlemen then that I dont know what happened  he got sick or something  and then he asked me to do th is three times a week  or something like this.
But he was a bad man because he did not come to cure sick peasant.
A few days after transferring out of the sick bay  the old camp for men in Birkenau was evacuated and it became part of the enlarge d female camp.
And she went to doctor and she went to the last chemotherapy and she got so sick she was in the hospital and they gave her the chemotherapy and she got blisters in her mouth.
Maybe first he was in the hospi tal but yes  he was very sick.
We were very tired  Luta was sick  and we were going together with the Russian soldiers  with Russian officers.
I got and I went to the doctor and they cut me here and I was so called   sick  and I lost my command and it was worse.
But she wa s uh  she was close to not naked you know  she was sick all the time.
And supposingly   I have no idea  but we tried to figure out why the Russians were so mad at the Germans  that after  when we came back to ourselves  when we we we were sick for two months.
In two -- when my wife got sick in April 20 03  I stopped  and that was the end of my professional life.
We Interview with Stanley Kiersnowski June 20  2014 70didnt know what Iran was  I didnt know where Teheran was  but I was sick.
And it was a very -- I had a really unpleasant evening.
Then was a sick woman in the hospital so the sick woman  we had to take back to that village.
And the other thing  we were so preoccupied with our s -- penury  we were poor  we really  you know  when I got sick and my grandmother came to -- to see -- to visit me  and she went -- she was there all day and she wanted to eat something  she we nt to the -- to the cupboard and there was nothing there.
Well I  uh...first thing after I...I  after I get out of my sick bed  was I went to GarmischPartenkirchen.
The first four days I was terribly seasick  and I was afraid to go down in my cabin because I always got sick.
I remember  sick as I was  that as the truck on which I was  I don't know  these were not ambulances  but I was  you know  I was comfortabl e. As it was leaving Bergen-Belsen  I could smell the fresh air.
I was close enough several times  but  I got lucky  I never got sick.
And I will never allow to...the communists to infiltrate our Polish ranks.ﬂ And he said  \ Well  you are responsible for your conditions of life  but try only not to offend them.ﬂ And I said  \ Well  the...these communists personally will never be offended by 14 me in my conversation  in my repression  and so on.ﬂ And I told the delegate  \ If the communistic consul general comes to our church...uh...to the Polish church  I will accept him really as the faith will.
If they got  lets say  cheese given them in cans  you got sick of that cheese.
But came -- they took me off the boat and I went to -- USHMM Archives RG-50.549.02*0026 27 went through all the thing -- you know  they ask me what I have with me and if I am sick or not sick.
They took him -- the Hungarians took him away and he got sick and he was in a hospital and they eventually  they burned down the hospital with all the patients and he was one among those patients  so he was burned alive in a hospital.
That was a plac e where I got very sick because I couldn't stand--I couldn't handle the atmosphere  the climate in a bakery  hot  dusty  stinking  dirty  terrible  always floating dust.
Some were   not just pe ople but they were 40 fortunate they didn't get sick because if you got sick it's the end.
My sister became ill  sick and she got a very high fever and she was dying.
He was very skinny  and we were both sick on Typhus  and he was there in Munchen for 11 months.
So I said to myself  ﬁThats enough.ﬂ I reported for sick bay every day and then they couldnt do anything more for me.
Once I was very  very sick  my pulse went up to 160.
We had wonderful times; there was no sign that she could ever be sick.
And I saw the first time fully digressed people sick  full with this  I don't know how you call it  but you have in your head  if you are not clean enough.
And after a month or so  they built a barrack which they called the   where the sick people were sent.
I think the sea must have gotten calmer  and I was already not -- because I was sick.
I want to tell you one thing  that when she was very sick  after the fourth time  her future husband came from the -- S: Army.
Oh yes...one time before that  because I thought Yelda was so sick  I said to her well we heard  you know...we saw a lot of people on the road already...it was an evacuation and people were on wagons sort of similar to when the war started  you know.
And the German doctor   with our Polish helper  go through and see what happened with some sick people or something.
He had one of these programs  like Voice of America 28 had later on  where he was broadcasting to Yugoslavia and railing against the Germans  and then when France fell  he went on not to Vichy he ended up in the United States  but he followed the French government where he could where he was broadcasting  and he ended up in the United States  and I ended up doing translations for the censors here for him  and when he was sick doing his br oadcasts for the Royal Yugoslav government  which was very funny  you were listening to that.
Because if the ki ds start crying  the SS will hear.
I got sick  and they took me to the hospital to take x-rays  something happen.
Actually  I missed this animal when it had to be killed  because at the later point in our stay in in the village  the the goat became sick and had to be slaughtered.
And...uh...the police department  and also a arm band and at that time the Germans didn't recognize if you're police or not police  so he...she pushed him out from the line as they were taking us to the side for the sick people and she said  Maybe you can help us.
Yeah  I did work -- since my first love always has been nursing  and I had a little training in Germany in Berlin  while I was in camp I had been sick quite often.
The two the other two sisters came  and they became sick also.
It was absolutely unreal but the thing was that we had so many frien ds who were sick and we tried to find them.
Only when we saw harbor  thats when my wife came to  and she was back to herself  so she at least -- otherwise she -- you know  she wasnt sick  per se  with any special sicknesses  but she was seasick.
And then I was so infested with the lice that my head  my skin was all rashes and bloody from scratching it so much.
Certainly at the -- the end  when Luta was so sick  you just kept pushing.
9 Yes  I wouldve loved to have been I di d  I was permitted from time to time to ride the trolley to school  but mostly I walked because that was healthy  but if I had been sick and the weather was dreadful  I would be driven to school  but the car was never permitted to stop there.
